ACT-101	Applied Accounting	Introduces the accounting cycle. Basic concepts covered include double-entry bookkeeping and examination of basic financial reports such as the balance sheet, statement of owner's equity and income statement. Emphasis on cash receipts, cash disbursements, accounts receivable and accounts payable. Some assignments made using general ledger accounting software. Intended to be the first accounting course for students who have not taken high school accounting or have no accounting experience.
ACT-105	Personal Accounting and Finance	Overview of practical business procedures, covering banking procedures (ATM, statements), investment matters, budgeting, insurance, payroll and associated taxes, interest, marketing and other economic issues, and other areas important to economic survival in a highly sophisticated business environment.
ACT-110	Financial Accounting I	Introduction to financial accounting, through the theory and logic underlying accounting procedures as well as the measurement and presentation of financial data. Brief review of the basic accounting cycle. Development of fundamental concepts in determination of income and presentation of financial position of business firms. Exposure to partnership accounting as well as coverage of corporation accounting including stocks, stockholder equity transactions, and bonds. Introduction to international accounting as well as statement of cash flows.
ACT-115	Computerized Accounting I	Exposure to some of the most popular accounting software used in the marketplace by small and medium sized businesses. Computer application packages include Quickbooks, Peachtree, and Microsoft Excel. For students continuing their accounting/ business education or who want more knowledge in computerized accounting applications.
ACT-130	Managerial Accounting	Introduction to relevant costs for decision making, controlling, contribution approach to decision-making, and absorption costing versus direct costing effect on income. Coverage of segment profitability, budgeting, capital projects, selection and subsequent evaluation, cost volume and allocation involving joint costs decentralization, and performance measurement and transfer pricing. Emphasis on performance standards, activity-based costing, variance analysis, and responsibility accounting.
ACT-198	Accounting Internship	Students placed in a position or in business to gain practical experience and learn specific operational technologies.
ACT-210	Intermediate Accounting I	Accounting theory and practice related to the acquisition, use and disposal of fixed and intangible assets. Recognition and measurement of current assets including cash and inventories are covered. Includes comprehensive study of financial statements. <em>Spring.</em>
ACT-220	Intermediate Accounting II	Continuation of accounting theory. Examination of traditional plant assets, long-term liabilities, stockholders equity and current subjects of controversy. Emphasis on income taxes, leases, inflation accounting, cash flow statements, pension accounting, determination of earnings per share and investments.
ACT-240	Individual Income Tax Accounting	Fundamentals of federal income taxation with emphasis on individuals. Topics include determination of income, exclusions, exemptions, personal and business deductions, credits, accounting methods, and capital gains and losses.
ACT-245	Cost Accounting	Focus on accountant as information gatherer and interpreter. Includes fundamental elements of production costs, budgeting, standard costs, and analysis of variances relate to interpretation and control of production costs, costing of spoilage, waste and scrap, and activity-based costing.
ANT-102	Introduction to Cultural Anthropology	Study of diverse human cultures. Introduction of basic concepts and techniques practiced by cultural anthropologists. Topics include language, kinship, gender, economics, politics, ecology, and religion. Discussion of problems resulting when traditional societies confront industrial societies or industrialization.
ANT-103	Introduction to Archaeology	Introduction to archaeology, with emphasis on scientific methods and procedures, tools, and techniques used by archaeologists to recover information about the past from the material remains.
ANT-105	Introduction to Biological Anthropology	Survey of common topics, including human evolutionary fossil record, modern physical variations such as race, forensics, and primate behavior and evolution.
ANT-151	World Archaeology	Examines archaeological discoveries from prehistoric cultures and ancient civilizations of Africa, Asia, Europe, the Americas, and Oceania. Exploration of human achievements from earliest human ancestors to the present to develop understanding of human condition and foundations of modern world.
ANT-161	Archaeology of Religion	Study of what archaeology reveals about early religions beyond the information contained in historical texts. Material evidence provides different perspectives on the development, practice, and spread of religions around the world. Focus is on ancient Near East ? a shared backdrop for the emergence of the world religions of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
ANT-171	Introduction to Egyptology	Introduction to history, geography, society, and culture of Ancient Egypt. Special emphasis on archaeological remains. A look at how ancient Egypt foundation for the modern world has been studied and portrayed.
ANT-181	The Archaeology of Mythology	Investigate what archaeology can add to the study of mythology and of the cultures that created these stories. Topics include both prehistoric and historic time periods from around the world, with a special emphasis on Classical Greece and Rome.
ANT-201	Field School in Archaeology	Exploration of practical methods of archaeological survey and excavation needed to learn about past civilizations and cultures. Students will participate in a dig or survey project in St. Charles County or at a location such as New Mexico or Madagascar.
ANT-202	Current Debates in Anthropology	Focuses on contemporary debates in anthropology (such as ? do sexually egalitarian societies exist? Did Neanderthals interbreed with modern humans? Is ethnic conflict inevitable?) from all four subdisciplines of the field. Special emphasis and discussion of current issues in cultural anthropology.
ANT-220	Middle East:  People and Cultures	Survey of the cultural similarities and differences among the peoples of the Near and Middle East, including historical, ethnological, and contemporary relationships.
ANT-224	People and Cultures of Africa	General anthropological survey of African cultures and civilizations, past and present, throughout the continent.
ANT-290	Topics in Anthropology	Exploration of topic selected by instructor. Topic varies depending on semester and instructor.
ARB-101	Arabic Language and Culture I	Basic Arabic language skills includes speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing, with emphasis on effective linguistic functioning in real situations. Explores cultures of Arabic-speaking countries.
ARB-102	Arabic Language and Culture II	Continuation of ARB 101. Explores cultures of Arabic-speaking countries.
ARB-190	Topics in Arabic Language and Culture	Exploration of special topics and/or activities in Arabic language and culture.
ARB-201	Arabic Language and Culture III	Follow-up to ARB 102. Expanded opportunities for listening to, speaking, reading, and writing Modern Standard Arabic. Continued exploration of culture, with an emphasis on Arab intellectuals, poets and writers. Emphasis remains on linguistic functioning in real situations.
ARB-202	Arabic Language and Culture IV	Follow-up to ARB 201. Precise and coherent use of Modern Standard Arabic language through development of the speaking, reading, writing and listening skills; more focus on syntax, morphology, and grammar. Students will take part in meaningful, functional communication that might be encountered in real life complex situations. Varied reading and writing activities representing cultural topics will be included. Media Arabic will be introduced.
ART-1001	Art Appreciation	Lectures to stimulate visual, emotional and intellectual awareness of humankind's artistic heritage. Covers historically significant art forms from prehistoric through postmodernism. The course will not fulfill the requirements for a major in art.
ART-1101	Mac Basics	Introduction to Macintosh computer platform. Overview of computer hardware, basic factory-installed software. Macintosh operation, troubleshooting, repair, and practices. Input and output devices, such as scanners, digital cameras, video equipment and printers.
ART-1105	Digital Art Studio	Focus on introducing students to digital art forms, software programs, and the interrelationship of art and technology. Students will gain experience using digital tools to create fine art &amp; graphic communications pieces weaving technical skills into creative vision.
ART-1200	2-D Design	Introduction to the basic study, use, and control of the art elements and principles of two-dimensional design that are fundamental to all visual arts through assigned problems using readings, discussion and exercises employing a variety of materials and tools.&nbsp;
ART-1205	Color Theory	Continue to build mastery in both use and understanding of design elements and principles with specific emphasis on the interaction and application of color in design and exploration of various color theories through a series of exercises.&nbsp;
ART-1300	3-D Design	Introduction to the basic study, use, and control of the art elements and principles that govern three-dimensional design and structure through assigned problems using readings, discussion and exercises designed to employ of a variety of concepts, materials and tools specific to the construction of three-dimensional art making.
ART-1400	Drawing I	Introduction to drawing through variety of methods, both traditional and contemporary. Emphasis placed on analysis of space and form as well as familiarization with and control of drawing material. Introduction to line, perspective, shading, and texture.
ART-1405	Drawing II	Continuation of ART 1400 (110) reassessing methods and analysis with emphasis on color theory and use of wet and dry media.
ART-1500	Survey of Western Art History I:  Prehistory to End of the Middle Ages	Survey art history course focusing on historically significant cultures and forms of art and architecture in Western Civilization. Exploration of the development of human achievements from Prehistory to the end of the Middle Ages.&nbsp;
ART-1505	Survey of Western Art History II:  Renaissance to the Twentieth Century	Survey art history course focusing on historically significant cultures and forms of art and architecture in Western Civilization. Exploration of the development of human achievements from the Renaissance to the 20th century.&nbsp;
ART-2100	History of Graphic Design	This is a survey course on the history of Graphic Design. This course will cover the history and development of visual communication. It will begin with the development of language and will trace the evolution of word and image throughout history using the works of designers and illustrators that have influenced the continuing development of the discipline. There will be an emphasis on the influence of technology, culture, major artistic movements, and socio-political factors on the evolution of graphic design.&nbsp;
ART-2110	Page Layout	Focus on page layout, publication design, and layout techniques covering a range of work, from flyers, brochures, magazines, multi-page publishing as well as electronic formats. Typography, use of space and traditional industry standards and practices included as well as prepress guidelines for both print and electronic media.
ART-2120	Typography	Focus of course will stress the refined use of typography as a design and communication tool. Students will study the history and classifications of letter-forms and use it in the creation of various typographical designs and presentations. Typical projects may range from letter and alphabet design to the use of typographical forms as the feature design elements in graphic designs or page layouts.
ART-2130	Digital Imaging & Illustration	Focus on the creation and digital manipulation of artwork &amp; images increasing familiarity with basic tools used the design. Projects focus on artwork and logo creation, image correction and adjustment, combining imagery, color correction, etc. Discussion and demonstration of traditional printing technology. Review of legal issues related to digital imagery and freelance design included.
ART-2140	Web Design	Emphasis on web page design &amp; development. Topics include the conceptualization and construction of a variety of web sites, including individual pages, HTML, email, animation, etc. Implementation of all aspects of graphic design will play a part in the overall class. This is a continuation of student design studies, applying graphic concepts to the interactive Web.
ART-2160	Motion Graphics	In this class students will learn the basics of motion graphics design and animation through completion of finished projects that may include movie/tv show titles, kinetic typography, commercials, info graphics and animated shorts.
ART-2170	Video Production	Course will focus on video art as an expressive media. Students will learn the basics of video production/post production through completion of finished projects that may include music videos, interview/maker videos, commercials, how to videos, comedy shorts and short form stories. Cost of course may exceed $200.
ART-2199	Portfolio Design and Professional Practices	Focus of the course will emphasize the opportunities and procedures in various fields of graphic design, illustration and the creative industries. Students will be guided in the preparation of a portfolio of their work, a resume, related documents and will learn practical interviewing techniques. The intent will be to prepare students to enter the art field with a confident and professional attitude.
ART-2210	Modern and Contemporary Art History	Art History lecture course focusing on significant artistic developments and forms of art and architecture through exploration of the development of human achievements in the modern and contemporary era.
ART-2220	History of Photography	Exploration of photography, its historical development, an examination of it as an art medium, and its influence on the development of modern art and contemporary culture.
ART-2300	Drawing III	Continuation of Drawing II. Emphasis on variety of drawing materials and subject matter as well as development of individual expression.
ART-2310	Figure Drawing I	Introduction to human-figure drawing through traditional and contemporary methods. Emphasis on analysis of space and form as well as human anatomy.
ART-2320	Figure Drawing II	Continuation of Figure Drawing I with introduction of color theory and wet-drawing media.
ART-2330	Figure Drawing III	Studio art course that expands upon the core principles explored in Figure Drawing I and II along with broader experimentation in use of materials and deeper personal expression.
ART-2390	Special Problems in Studio Art: Drawing	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2400	Painting I	Studio course where students work with oil paints to realistically represent subject matter in the tradition of Western Art and participate in critique sessions. Paint density, texture and chemistry will be discussed. The formal aspects of drawing will be applied. Painting demonstrations are designed to help each student understand the objective of the assignments. Students will prepare their own painting surfaces in order to learn and appreciate the craft involved with the entire process of creating a finished work of art.
ART-2401	Painting for Non-Art Majors	An introduction to the fundamental concepts of painting in a studio environment. Students will become familiar with the materials and techniques used in painting. This course will not fulfill the requirements for a major in art.
ART-2410	Painting II	Studio course where students work with paint to represent subject matter, broaden techniques learned in ART 2410, develop personal expression and participate in critique sessions. Paint density, texture and chemistry will be discussed. Painting demonstrations are designed to help each student understand the objective of the assignments. Students will prepare their own painting surfaces in order to learn and appreciate the craft involved with the entire process of creating a finished work of art.
ART-2420	Painting III	Continuation of Painting II. Special projects in both traditional and nontraditional materials and subject matter.
ART-2430	Topics:  Advanced Painting	Advanced course on contract individual study basis to gain greater expertise in painting.
ART-2490	Special Problems in Studio Art: Painting	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2500	Ceramics I	A study of the basic principles of ceramics and ceramic art making with emphasis on the hand-building process and introduction to wheel throwing. Studio operations such as clay mixing, clay recycling, glaze mixing and kiln loading will also be covered.
ART-2501	Ceramics for Non-Art Majors	An introduction to the fundamental concepts of ceramics in a studio environment. Students will become familiar with the materials and techniques used in ceramics. This course will not fulfill the requirements for a major in art.
ART-2510	Ceramics II	Continuation of Ceramics I with more emphasis on wheel throwing skills, experimentation with glazes and creative design and expression. How to run a ceramics facility is covered through course participation in studio operations.
ART-2520	Topics:  Advanced Ceramics	Advanced course on contract individual study basis to gain greater expertise in ceramics.
ART-2550	Jewelry I	Introduction to materials and processes of jewelry making. Techniques include cutting, piercing, filing, joining, casting, forging, soldering, and cold connections. Stress on intricacies of working with different metals and experimental media and design concepts along with personal expression.
ART-2551	Jewelry for Non-Art Majors	An introduction to the basic essentials of making jewelry in an art studio environment. Students will become familiar with the materials and techniques used in making jewelry. This course will not fulfill the requirements for a major in art.
ART-2560	Jewelry II	Further exploration and refinement of metal fabrication processes as introduced in Jewelry I. &nbsp;Techniques may include soldering, jewelry scale casting, surface embellishment techniques, enameling techniques, hydraulic die forming and mechanism design to create jewelry and small scale objects.
ART-2570	Topics: Advanced Jewelry	Advanced course on contract individual study basis to gain greater expertise in jewelry making.
ART-2590	Special Problems in Studio Art: Ceramics	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline
ART-2595	Special Problems in Studio Art: Jewelry	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2600	Sculpture I	Introduction to sculpture materials, skills, history, and concepts. Explores methods in manipulation of traditional and experimental sculptural media, including additive and subtractive techniques. Involves studio work, research, lecture, and discussion. Emphasis as much on learning technique as understanding concepts and personal expression.
ART-2601	Sculpture for Non-Art Majors	An introduction to the fundamental concepts of sculpture in a studio environment. Students will become familiar with the materials and techniques used in sculpture. This course will not fulfill the requirements for a major in art.
ART-2610	Sculpture II	Emphasis on artisanship, exploration, and research to gain more sophisticated and self-motivated personal direction. Introduces skills in welding and metal fabrication as well as individual media choices. May include some metal casting.
ART-2620	Figure Sculpture	Introduction to basics of figure sculpture using the human figure as reference for subject matter for modeling in clay over an armature. Some other ways of constructing the figure may also be investigated.
ART-2630	Topics:  Advanced Sculpture	Advanced course on contract individual study basis to gain greater expertise in sculpture.
ART-2690	Special Problems in Studio Art: Sculpture	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2700	Intro to Printmaking	Introduction to basic traditional printmaking processes. It is assumed upon entrance that students have no prior printmaking knowledge. Processes covered include: Woodcut (black and white woodcut, color woodcut), Intaglio (etching, acquaint, drypoint), and Monotype.
ART-2701	Printmaking for Non-Art Majors	An introduction to the fundamental concepts of printmaking in a studio environment. Students will become familiar with the materials and techniques used in printmaking. This course will not fulfill the requirements for a major in art.
ART-2710	Relief Printmaking	This course is designed to build upon basic relief printing processes covered in Intro to Printmaking. Processes covered include: Reductive woodcut, Multiple Block Woodcut, Wood Engraving, Monotype, and Relief Printed Collagraph.
ART-2720	Intaglio Printmaking	This course is designed to build upon basic intaglio processes covered in Intro to Printmaking. Processes covered include: Color Intaglio (multiple plate, a la poupee), Engraving, Soft Ground, Sugar lift, Spit Bite, and Collagraph.
ART-2730	Topics:  Advanced Printmaking	Advanced course on contract individual study basis to gain greater expertise in printmaking.
ART-2750	Fibers	In-depth exploration of the processes of creating art textiles. Draws upon contemporary and historical sources and personal imagery for expression using the fiber medium. Techniques include direct application of dyes and pigments with various resist methods, screen print processes, creating a dimensional fiber form, and exploring pattern structures. Students create within directed problems and develop abilities to verbalize ideas through conversations and critiques.
ART-2751	Fibers for Non-Art Majors	An introduction to the fundamental concepts of Fiber and Textile based art in a studio environment. Students will become familiar with the materials and techniques used in Fibers. This course will not fulfill the requirements for a major in art.
ART-2790	Special Problems in Studio Art: Printmaking	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2795	Special Problems in Studio Art: Fibers	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2800	Black & White Photography I	Introduction to basics and principles of black and white photography. Includes mechanical and visual aspects and darkroom skills for developing and printing black and white film. Requires manual single-lens reflex camera. Cost of course supplies may exceed $200.
ART-2810	Digital Photography I	Basic processes and procedures of creating imagery through the use of new technology and other devices.&nbsp; Explores digital tools and processes as a means for photographic input, output and basic image manipulation.&nbsp; Fundamental computer skills are required.&nbsp; Mac platform preferred.&nbsp; Students will be responsible for their own 8-10 megapixel adjustable digital camera minimum as well as other supplies.&nbsp; DSLR cameras with RAW capabilities are preferred.&nbsp; Cost of course supplies may exceed $200.
ART-2820	Black & White Photography II	Approach to photography primarily from creative visual aspect, emphasis is placed on concept development.&nbsp; Increases photographer's awareness of and sensitivity to visual aspects such as composition while refining mechanical skills such as exposure, developing and darkroom skills while using black &amp; white media.&nbsp; Requires manual single-lens reflex camera.&nbsp; Cost of course supplies may exceed $200.
ART-2830	Digital Photography II	Intermediate exploration of the aesthetics and techniques of digital photography including a further investigation of the constructed image, color management, asset management and output methods.&nbsp; Students will produce one or more portfolios of digital images.&nbsp; Students will be responsible for their own 8-10 megapixel adjustable digital camera minimum as well as other supplies.&nbsp; DSLR cameras with RAW capabilities are preferred.&nbsp; Cost of course supplies may exceed $200.
ART-2840	Photography III	This course is a continuation in understanding black and white and or digital photography, and in understanding photographic images in general in terms of how they function as art work; with emphasis on technical consistency and sophistication in expression of ideas.
ART-2850	Topics:  Advanced Photography	Advanced course on contract individual study basis to gain greater expertise in photography.
ART-2855	Special Topics in Photography	Variable content covering in-depth advanced topics in technique and subject matter not covered in regular curriculum. Topics vary and may include subjects such as portrait photography and lighting, location photography: landscape and architecture, non-silver photographic processes, working with color positives, etc. Class may be repeated for credit up to three times if different topic is studied.
ART-2860	Studio Lighting	Provides hands-on instruction in the photographic studio in the manipulation and utilization of light for the production of professional quality images. Students are taught to accurately control lighting for portraits, objects, products, etc. to create strong portfolio images. Cost of course supplies may exceed $200.
ART-2870	Event Photography	Students learn to use their technical expertise, creativity and composition skills to produce and preserve images that visually tell a story or record an event. Photographic techniques and location considerations are discussed as well as the business practices essential to be successful in the profession. Cost of course supplies may exceed $200.
ART-2890	Special Problems in Studio Art: Black & White Photography	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2895	Special Problems in Studio Art: Digital Photography	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2900	Illustration I	Course exploring techniques, materials and methods of illustration for commercial and fine art purposes. Projects emphasize individual creativity and concept but also emphasize working with clients.
ART-2910	Illustration II	Continuation of Illustration I with an advanced approach. Emphasis placed on subject interpretation and individual concept and creativity using variety of art mediums.
ART-2930	Gallery Management Internship	Basic processes and procedures of curating a fine art exhibition and managing exhibition space. Explore SCC's community art venue from a behind-the-scenes perspective while developing an understanding of the responsibilities of managing, funding, and maintaining exhibition space. Participation in installation and planning of SCC Gallery exhibitions. May involve field trips.
ART-2950	Visual Arts Studio Internship	On-the-job experience in visual arts. &nbsp;Students may apply for an internship with artists or art-related businesses to enhance career readiness. &nbsp;Visual arts studio internships must be approved and sponsored by a faculty&nbsp;advisor.&nbsp;
ART-2970	Art and Architecture Field Studies	Field course covering art, architecture, and history of a region of the world involving supervised on-site field studies and coursework outlined in an individual learning agreement. Includes lectures, directed readings, writing, drawing, photography, and other creative projects as well as visits to important sites and artifacts. Students must also register for and participate in approved academic study tour, study abroad, or field experience.
ART-2990	Special Problems in Studio Art: Illustration	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2995	Special problems in Studio Art	Advanced study in studio art discipline beyond courses appearing in this catalog. Projects predetermined through interview with instructor, completed during studio times offered in discipline.
ART-2999	Sophomore Studio Art Seminar	A course for art majors planning to transfer to a four-year institution for a Bachelor of Fine Arts degree or a BA degree in Studio Art. This course will guide students in how to photograph their artwork and prepare their visual art portfolio for review by the transfer institutions and exhibition spaces. Opportunities and procedures in the various fields of visual art will be discussed. Other necessary skills such as artist resume writing and artist statement writing will also be undertaken.
BIO-095	Pre-A&P Foundations in Science	This course provides the foundations of scientific terminology and concepts useful for success in Anatomy &amp; Physiology I (acceptable prerequisite for BIO 250A/250B). Topics include: scientific method, chemistry of life, cell biology, genetics, energetics, overview of human systems.&nbsp; This course is graded on a Pass/Fail basis. &nbsp; Offered online only.
BIO-100	Introductory Biology	Introduction to biology, the science of life. Includes origin and nature of life, from simplest single-celled forms to complex plants and animals and human beings. Appreciation of diversity and unity in living world by studying form and organization of the bacteria and other cells to specialization of structures in human body. Offered online only.
BIO-105	Essentials of Biology	Examines fundamental principles of biology. Includes organization of living things, scientific method, cell and molecular biology, genetics, ecology, evolution, and relationship between biology and society. Suitable for non-science majors.
BIO-106	Essentials of Biology Laboratory	Emphasis on use of methodologies typical of biological studies. Compliments topics covered in BIO 105. Suitable for non-science majors.
BIO-110	Human Biology	Survey of human body structure and function for non-science major. Study of all organ systems of the body along with current topics in human biology.
BIO-113	Human Biology Laboratory	Use of models, specimens, and investigative activities intended to enhance study of human organism.
BIO-120	Introduction to Ecology	Explores structure and function of ecosystems. Study of general ecological principles in context of current problems in world's ecosystems.&nbsp; Course includes field trips to off-campus locations.&nbsp; Hybrid course. &nbsp; (For non-science majors.)
BIO-121	Introduction to Ecology Laboratory	Ecological investigations in field and laboratory settings and procedures similar to those used by ecologists to study the natural world. Investigations will complement topics covered in BIO 120. Course includes field trips to off campus locations. Requires concurrent enrollment in BIO 120.
BIO-122	Environmental Sciences	Study of biological and physical characteristics and principles of nature. Deals with diverse topics such as ecology, endangered species, pollution, meteorology, earth studies, populations, etc. Occasional guest speakers or field trips included. (For non-science majors)
BIO-130	Human Sex and Reproduction	Human reproduction from biological point of view. Topics include human inheritance (from chromosomes to biotechnology), human reproduction (male and female anatomy and physiology), fetal development and birth, sexually transmitted diseases (emphasis on AIDS epidemic), and evolution of sexual reproduction. (For non-science majors.)
BIO-150	General Biology I	Basic principles of plant and animal biology, including cell biology, biochemistry, energetics, genetics, evolution, and ecology. Appreciation of scientific method in general and biological methodology. Lab component will emphasize the use of methodologies typical of biological studies. For science majors.
BIO-151	General Biology II	Continuation of General Biology I. Emphasis on botany, zoology, animal systems, behavior, taxonomy. Lab component will feature laboratory and field activities that complement studies in lecture. For science majors.
BIO-160	General Botany	Introduction to diversity of plant kingdom. Topics include plant cell structure, physiology of plant cell, study of major groups of plants and their life cycles, and study of various biomes. Includes laboratory component. Spring only.
BIO-242	Anatomy and Physiology Supplement	Supplement and reinforcement of concepts presented in BIO 250A and 250B. Strongly recommended for students who have failed or received a "W" in BIO 250A or its equivalent; recommended for all students in BIO 250A.
BIO-246	Microbiology	Basic concepts of microbiology including metabolism, genetics, and inhibition of bacteria, fungi and viruses. Emphasis on human pathogens, infection, resistance, and immunity. Laboratory exercises reinforce lecture concepts and teach fundamental skills in microscopy, aseptic technique, isolation, and identification of microorganisms.
BIO-250B	Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory I	Activities to enhance study of topics covered in the lecture section (BIO 250A). Use of models, charts, and both microscopic and gross specimens to illustrate various systems.
BIO-250A	Anatomy and Physiology I	Structure and function of human body, with particular attention to cell biology, skeletal system, muscular system, nervous system and endocrine system.
BIO-251B	Anatomy and Physiology Laboratory II	Continuation of BIO 250B (previously BIO 243). Use of laboratory activities to enhance study of human body structure and function.
BIO-251A	Anatomy and Physiology II	Continuation of study of structure and function of human body. Topics include cardiovascular system, lymphatic system, respiratory system, digestive system, urinary system, and reproduction.
BIO-265	Pathophysiology	Study of mechanisms of disease conditions. Working from foundation of normal function, exploration of what can go wrong and how. Emphasis on conditions most commonly encountered by today's health professionals. Combination of lecture, discussion, and seminar.
BIO-270	Kinesiology	Study of movement of the human body. Emphasis on elements of skeletomuscular system and how they produce movements. Examines role of nervous coordination of body movement. Combination of lecture and lab.
BIO-280	Nutrition Pathways	Scientific study of the essential nutrients and their function in the body. Recommended nutrient intakes, diet assessments and planning, relationships between diet and health will also be covered.
BIO-291	Natural History Field Studies	Field course covering topics in the natural history of a specific region of the world. Supervised on-site field studies and coursework in an individual learning agreement. Lectures, directed readings, writing, and other creative projects, or online/distance coursework. Approved academic study tour, study abroad, or field experience required.
BIO-295	Topics in Biology	Topics in biology presented as complete course. May be repeated for credit if the same topic is not repeated. (May require permission of the instructor)
BIO-297	Topics in Biology Laboratory	Experimental component of Biology 295 if appropriate for the topic.
BUS-101	Introduction to Business	Survey course covering many facets of business; a general knowledge of the modern business environment. Review of economic, social, legal, and ethical systems affecting U.S. firms. General concepts of business organization, management, people aspects of business, together with functions of production, marketing (including international), accounting, finance, computers, and information systems.
BUS-105	Business Ethics	Introductory survey of classical and contemporary ethical theories related to current business and computer situations and problems with an emphasis on case studies and examples (formerly BUS 250).&nbsp;Students may not receive credit for both BUS 105 and CPT 105.
BUS-115	Introduction to Public Relations	Basic functions of public relations in the public and private sector. Emphasis on history, case studies and writing, including press releases, media plans and speeches. Media's role in public relations, and role in shaping and swaying public opinion. Specific jobs and emphasis areas also covered.
BUS-198	Business Administration Internship	Students placed in position in an agency or in business to gain practical experience and learn specific operational technologies.
BUS-201	Principles of Management	Presents management and organizational concepts with application to realistic organizational situations. Areas covered include management theory past and present, functions of management, organizational structure (centralization/ decentralization), span of control, motivation theories and practice, together with decision making in daily operations of marketing, production, forecasting, distribution and contemporary issues. Course structured around functions of management planning, organizing, staffing, directing and controlling.
BUS-204	Total Quality Operations Management	Examines many choices each organization makes on journey to achieving excellence. Study of exemplary organizations, their operational choices, and how those decisions lead to improved financial and market performance. Addresses key operational issues in services and manufacturing such as inventory, production methods, capacity planning, production planning, total quality management, re-engineering business processes, and statistical process control. Examines qualitative and quantitative methods in operations of well-known organizations.
BUS-206	Human Resources Management	Covers many functions involved in personnel administration as performed by human resources department administrator and line managers. Explores aspects of human resource management: planning, recruiting, interviewing, selecting, placing, training, motivating, evaluating, rewarding, and disciplining employees. Presentation of pay systems, job evaluations, and some labor/management issues. Use of case analysis.
BUS-208	Entrepreneurship/ Small Business Management	Study of small business and its importance in American economy. Analysis of problems of small business through use of case studies. Application of functions of management to small business environment, including personnel, finance, promotion, government relations, ethics, and insurance.
BUS-210	Organizational Behavior	Deals with people at work in various organizational situations and how to motivate human assets to work together more effectively. Analysis of how to meet needs and goals of employees within organization while making organization productive. Covers motivation theories, communications, status and role behavior and contemporary human relations issues in firms.
BUS-220	Principles of Finance	Basics of financial analysis, forecasting, operating and financial leverage, working capital, current asset management, short-term financing, time value concepts and practices, and cost of capital equity financing, dividend policy, convertible bonds, warrants and options. Includes role of financial manager in organization.
BUS-230	Principles of Marketing	Introduces consumer and institutional behavior patterns and overall role of marketing in the economy. Examines marketing process and its functions, together with marketing mix (place, product, price and promotion). Presents psychological and societal motivations that translate need through demand to satisfaction. Provides means to evaluate firm's capabilities, develop marketing strategies, and introduce marketing techniques to meet objectives. Review of marketing ethics and some international aspects of marketing.
BUS-232	Advertising and Sales Promotion	Introduction to theory, practice, and techniques of advertising. Consideration of role of advertising and sales promotion. General survey of kinds and purposes of media, psychological implications of typical appeals, and limited practice in promotional programming. Coordination of advertising display and publicity in context of realistic sales promotion programs.
BUS-234	Retailing	Fundamentals of retail store organization and management, including store location, layout, buying, pricing operation, advertising, display, and analysis associated with merchandise handling. Area retailers invited to discuss actual application of various retailing activities, e.g. buying, advertising, and inventory control.
BUS-236	Consumer Behavior	Marketing strategy and tactics explained based on explicit or implicit beliefs about consumer behavior. Included are external influences to buying, internal influences, the consumer's buying decision process, social and ethical issues in consumer behavior. Presents information search and consumer research methods as well as ultimate consumer and industrial buyers.
BUS-238	Personal Selling	Fundamentals of personal selling from the determination of customer needs to the close of the sale. Treats factors such as customer problems, merchandising knowledge, and personality traits of successful salespersons. Covers special selling topics and the role of the sales manager, together with motivation and compensation of the sales staff.
BUS-246	Legal Environment of Business	Introduction to general nature of law and how its meaning affects climate in which a business operates. Exploration of role of government and government's attitude toward business, antitrust legislation and enforcement, public control through taxation, regulation, competition, mergers, and commerce/trade restrictions. Covers freedom of contract and labor/management relations.
BUS-255	International Business	Survey course to develop understanding and appreciation of environments and operations of international business. The nature of international business, international environment, organizations and monetary systems, foreign environment, and management tools that deal with environmental forces.
BUS-270	E-marketing	Examines impact of the Internet on traditional methods of marketing and related business functions. Explores existing and potential use of the Internet for marketing goods and services. Analyzes the effect of the Internet on marketing strategy and the marketing mix.
BUS-272	Social Media Marketing	Examines how to develop an effective strategy for communicating to a targeted audience using the accelerated tools available in an online market. Will touch on the use of Social Media, Email Marketing, Blogging, SEO and PPC advertisements to create engagement. It will also cover the use of Google Analytics to track performance.
BUS-298	Business Administration Capstone	This course is a culminating experience integrating all the course work taken in the Business Administration Associate of Applied Science program. This course includes individual and programmatic assessment. All Business Administration AAS degree-seeking students are required to take this capstone class in their final semester before graduating.
BTC-101	Keyboarding	Introduction to computer keyboard and development of correct techniques for keyboarding documents. Speed and accuracy exercises to develop necessary skill level. Emphasis on straight copy skills, basic keyboarding applications, and document formatting such as letters, memos, reports, and tabulation problems. Designed for both beginning typists and individuals who need to refresh keyboarding skills.
BTC-103	Microcomputer Applications	Introduces use of business applications in word processing, spreadsheets, databases and presentations. Windows application package used for each application. (PC-based software only) Keyboarding skills recommended. Students may not receive credit for both BTC (BAS) 103 and CPT 103.
BTC-105	Proofreading and Editing Business Documents	Emphasizes document formatting and review of basic related grammar and punctuation rules. Proofreading and editing techniques applied to business documents.
BTC-122	Skillbuilding	Improves speed and accuracy of keyboarding/ typing skills in preparation for job entry and testing. Concentration on individual goals and skill improvement.
BTC-130	Customer Service Excellence	Develop fundamental principles of serving customer needs. Learn to analyze situations, develop solutions, implement and evaluate effectiveness, and train others. Covers all vital areas to help handle customers professionally, effectively, and successfully. Build good rapport with customers and associates.
BTC-131	Telephone Communication Skills	Improve telephone skills to meet needs of work place and become more customer service oriented in handling of telephone communications. Techniques of scripting and organization. Practice handling variety of customers.
BTC-132	Time Management	Time management techniques and organizational planning to improve efficiency on the job. Identify strengths and weaknesses. Develop prioritization skills and learn how and when to delegate.
BTC-135	Your Professional Image	Review of appropriate business etiquette in today's work place. Real applications of best way to develop and maintain a professional image.
BTC-136	Electronic Communication with Stakeholders	Apply fundamental communication rules and etiquette to electronic communication and calendars with all stakeholders (employees, customers, vendors, stockholders, etc). Learn how electronic communication has changed internal and external communication, and see how social media fits into this new model. <i>Spring</i>
BTC-137	Interpersonal Skills	Develop interpersonal skills needed for today's diverse work place. Learn to make decisions using problem-solving techniques. Study different types of customers and workers and how to communicate and work successfully with each.
BTC-138	Introduction to Project Management	Build a foundation of project management terminology and skills. &nbsp;learn to budget and schedule tasks while avoiding common pitfalls.
BTC-145	Business Technology Tools	Emphasis on the use of technology found in today's business environment. Students will enter and edit information as well as manipulate and format data using the current technology. Voice recognition, mobile computing devices, and other input methods to complete administrative tasks will be addressed.
BTC-150	Managing Personal Information – Outlook	Learn to use Outlook effectively to maintain your personal and/or work information. Topics include: handling e-mail, organizing contacts and tasks, using notes, managing calendars, and scheduling meetings and resources.
BTC-160	Word Processing - MS Word	Focus on learning intermediate and advanced concepts and functions of current version of MS Word. Topics include creating, editing and saving documents to intermediate and advanced functions like merges, macros, tables, wizards/templates, to multi-page documents with many special features.
BTC-165	Presentations Using PowerPoint	Presentation and application of beginning through advanced functions of PowerPoint. Topics include: create effective graphic presentations, organize and outline content of presentation, format text and graphics, apply tools, correctly chart/graph information, change color schemes, and create customized templates. Use of resources available for preparing presentations, including effective presentation skills. <i>Spring</i>
BTC-170	Spreadsheet Applications - Excel	Presentation and application of business functions of Excel. Topics include formulas and functions, absolute/relative cell references, templates, reports, charting/graphing, formatting, and integration of Excel and MS Word.
BTC-175	Database Applications - Access	Presentation and application of Access functions. Topics include: plan and design tables, query data, design and generate forms and reports, establish relationships, manage multiple databases, integrate Access with other MS Office applications.<em> Fall</em>
BTC-190	Planning and Design Concepts-Microsoft Publisher	Focus is on preparation, planning, and design of various desktop publishing documents using Microsoft Publisher. Design basics and elements of design such as planning message for target audience, consistency, proportion, balance, color choice, and unity will be emphasized.
BTC-245	Administrative Procedures	Develop understanding of procedures in today's electronic office. Review of composition, telecommunications, electronic mail, making travel and meeting arrangements, document formatting, financial statements, records management, human relations, job application procedures, and decision-making skills. Students must be available for shadowing hours in local business. Students must earn a C or above in the course in order to graduate. Hybrid course.
BTC-247	Administrative Supervision	Supervision of employees, including how to handle personnel problems, hire, terminate, and promote employees. Also, budgeting, employee evaluations, and use of decision-making skills. Students must be available for shadowing hours in local business. Students must earn a C or above in the course in order to graduate. Hybrid course.
BTC-250	Business Simulations	Application of all MS Office and desktop publishing skills to complete various office simulation projects. Use of critical thinking, time management, organizational skills, and integration of computer skills as performance standards. Implementation of a realistic work environment. Students must earn a C or above in the course in order to graduate. Hybrid course.
BTC-290	Publishing Projects- Adobe inDesign	This course will reinforce planning and design concepts with a focus on preparing desktop publishing documents and marketing items on a project basis. Importance will be placed on real-world application of design basics and applying those while learn to use Adobe InDesign.<em> Fall odd years only</em>
CHM-101	Introduction to Chemistry	Introduction to basic principles of chemistry, including measurements and problem-solving, atomic theory, chemical nomenclature, chemical reactions, molecular structure, properties of gases, liquids and solids, acid-base chemistry and oxidation-reduction chemistry.
CHM-103	Introduction to Chemistry Laboratory	Hands-on course with emphasis on proper laboratory techniques and experimental activities that illustrate concepts studied in CHM 101.
CHM-106	Chemistry for Allied Health	This is a one-semester lab and lecture course providing students with basic concepts in general, organic, and biological chemistry. It will assist students in problem-solving skills and significantly emphasize the applications of chemistry to human health. This is not a general education course for the AA Degree.
CHM-115	General Chemistry I	Study of how compounds are formed and named, chemical equations, calculations and problem-solving involving elements, compounds and chemical equations including stoichiometry, thermochemistry; properties of gases, solids, solutions, and acids and bases. Experiments introduce basic lab skills and aspects of qualitative and quantitative analysis.
CHM-116	General Chemistry II	Continuation of Chemistry I. Includes study of chemical equilibria, acid-base chemistry, complex ions, thermodynamics, oxidation-reduction reactions, nuclear chemistry, and introduction to organic chemistry. Experiments continue to introduce and improve laboratory skills and problem solving.
CHM-222	Quantitative Analysis	Principles and practice of quantitative chemistry including descriptive statistics; equilibria pertaining to acid-base, complexometric, redox and solubility; volumetric analysis; spectrophotometric analysis and an introduction to chromatography.<em> Fall</em>
CHM-240	Organic Chemistry I	Introduction to structure, nomenclature, properties, synthesis and reactions of aliphatic and aromatic carbon compounds.
CHM-241	Organic Chemistry II	Continuation of study of structure, nomenclature, properties, synthesis and reactions of aliphatic and aromatic carbon compounds with emphasis on chemistry of carbonyl compounds.
CHM-243	Organic Chemistry Laboratory	Hands-on introduction to laboratory techniques and procedures of organic synthesis and identification.
CDC-101	Introduction to Early Childhood Education	Overviews historical and contemporary early childhood programs and curriculum. Examines qualities and skills necessary for working effectively with young children. Surveys range of opportunities open to child care personnel in various early childhood settings. Site observations are part of course work. Fall and Spring. Summer, even years.
CDC-102	Creative Activities and Play for Young Children	Introduces techniques and materials to foster creativity, imagination and artistic expression. It investigates the role of play in children's development. Examines teacher's role in planning and implementing process-oriented activities. Site observations are a part of the course work. Students may not receive credit for both EDU 202 and CDC 102.
CDC-103	Literacy and Literature for Young Children	Utilizes various genres of children's literature and other materials to support emergent literacy and language development in young children. Site observations are a part of the course work.
CDC-104	Principles of Early Childhood Curriculum	Students may not receive credit for both EDU 204 and CDC 104.
CDC-105	Early Childhood Practicum I	Involves observation and participation, under qualified supervision, in early childhood education settings. Coordinates with course objectives from CDC 104. The practicum experience is also paired with a coordinating seminar, CDC 109. Site observations are a part of the course work.
CDC-106	Experiences in Early Childhood Education	This course provides for variable credit for prior professional development learning experiences related to working with young children from birth to age 8. Variable credit for prior learning experience based upon evaluation by child care program director.
CDC-107	Introduction to Young Children with Special Needs	Introduces characteristics of individuals with exceptionalities and overviews history and educational theories related to individuals with exceptionalities, especially children. Examines impact of disabilities and other special needs on individuals, families, schools and communities. Site observations are a part of the course work. Students cannot receive credit for both EDU 207 and CDC 107.
CDC-108	Infant and Toddler Development and Curriculum	Follows development of infants and toddlers (conception to 3 years of age). Examines theories of physical, cognitive (including language), social and emotional areas of development. Emphasis on developmentally appropriate activities, materials, room arrangement, and scheduling. Guided observation, record-keeping for assessment, and interaction with infants and toddlers. Site observations are a part of the course work. Summer, odd years.
CDC-109	Early Childhood Practicum I Seminar	Provides opportunities for discussion and collaboration among students about field experiences. it supports course objectives from CDC 105. Requires concurrent enrollment in CDC 104, 105.&nbsp;Fall
CDC-112	Child Growth and Development I: Prenatal through Early Childhood	Study of human development from conception to approximately age 6. Investigates theories related to physical, cognitive (including language), social and emotional growth and development. Examines relationship among areas of development and the connection between development and children's behaviors. Site observations are a part of the coursework.
CDC-113	Child Growth and Development II: Birth through Adolescence	Exploration of human development throughout the lifespan and investigation of theories related to physical, cognitive (including language), social and emotional growth and development. Examines relationships among areas of development as well as the connection between development and behavior. Focus is also on developmental issues in childhood, adolescence and adulthood. Site observations are a part of this course work.
CDC-201	Cognitive Activities & STEM for Young Children	Focus on developmentally appropriate methods and materials to enhance young children's awareness of science, technology, engineering and math concepts. Emphasizes techniques to develop observation, problem solving and thinking skills. Site observations are a part of the course work. Students may not receive credit for both CDC 201 and EDU 201.
CDC-202	Music and Movement for Young Children	Explores music and movement activities to support perceptual, fine, and gross motor development. Overviews techniques to enhance creative movement and singing. Spring
CDC-203	Early Childhood Practicum II	Involves practical teaching experience with young children, under qualified supervision, in early childhood classroom setting. It includes lesson planning and implementation, assessment and record keeping, communicating with parents and families, and all other phases of classroom operation. Site observations are part of the course work.
CDC-204	Management of Early Childhood Programs	Emphasizes operation and management of early childhood programs including issues related to staffing, curriculum and program planning, funding, facilities, public relations, and licensing and accreditation. Site observations are a part of the course work. Spring &amp; Summer - even years.
CDC-205	Children, Families and Communities	Overviews interrelationships between children, families and society. Highlights topics of home/school, communication and involvement, community resources and societal influences such as violence and divorce. Student cannot receive credit for both CDC 205 and EDU 205.
CDC-206	Early Childhood Practicum III	Involves comprehensive teaching experience with young children, under qualified supervision, in early childhood classroom setting. Includes lesson planning and implementation, assessment and record-keeping, communicating with parents and families, and all other phases of classroom operation. Site observations are a part of the course work.
CDC-207	Curriculum and Materials for Young Children with Special Needs	Reviews methods and techniques for planning and adapting instruction for learners with special needs. Provides experience with observing and recording, screening and assessment instruments, and other resources for implementing individualized learning plans. Site observations are a part of the course work.
CDC-208	Nutrition, Health and Safety of Children	Examines nutrition, health and safety factors affecting children from birth through adolescence. Topics include dietary requirements and nutrition education, health assessment, childhood illnesses and immunizations, first aid, accident prevention and child abuse recognition and intervention. Students may not receive credit for both EDU 208 and CDC 208.
CDC-209	Early Childhood Practicum II Seminar	This is a co-requisite seminar that supports course objectives for CDC 203 Early Childhood Practicum II. It provides opportunities for discussion and collaboration among students about field experiences.
CDC-210	Early Childhood Practicum III Seminar	Provides opportunities for discussion and collaboration among students about field experiences. The seminar supports course objectives from CDC 206.
COL-090	College Study Skills	Develops, improves, and practices study skills critical to success in college. Skills include time management, concentration, memory, SQ4R textbook study method, note taking from both lecture and textbook, exam preparation and test taking.
COL-101	College Success Seminar	For freshman students covering various aspects of college life including resources and procedures, interacting with instructors, instructor expectations, critical thinking, goal setting and commitment, learning styles, development of network and support groups, value of education and philosophy of learning, identification of student interests and needs, technology used in college classes and study skills. Required of all first-time freshmen students.
COL-104	Online Information and Internet Research	Skills needed to select and search online information sources. Focus is on strategies for searching online catalogs, indexes, and the Internet. Includes resource comparison, evaluation and citation, and types of information.
COL-110	Career Development	Assists in making career decisions through assessment of interests, values and abilities. Application of these traits to world of work to find career as appropriate combination of these three. In-depth exploration of several careers.
COL-299	Sophomore Portfolio Assessment	Students will complete activities from 3 different general education discipline areas: Humanities, Social Science, and Multicultural/Valuing which will include evidence of Higher Order Thinking (HOT) and Managing Information (MI). Students may bring 1 artifact from a previous General Education course and revise it to meet the capstone criteria.
COM-102	Introduction to Mass Communication	Focus on different modes of mass communication including radio, television, film, video, magazines, newspapers, publishing, advertising, public relations, photography, and telecommunications. Development of media from invention to present, effects of media on society, government controls, censorship, and other issues.
COM-112	Introduction to Radio and Television Broadcasting	Introduction to broadcasting, including history, government regulations, station operation, and program development.
COM-115	Introduction to Public Relations	Basic functions of public relations in public and private sector. Emphasis on history, case studies, and writing including press releases, media plans, and speeches. Media role in public relations, and role in shaping and swaying public opinion. Specific jobs and emphasis areas covered.
COM-120	Electronic News Gathering	Instruction in video skills for pre-production, production, and post-production of television news. On-location, single-camera shooting will be emphasized. Includes lectures, discussions, practical applications, and evaluations.
COM-123	Introduction to Cinema	Introduction to history, theory and criticism of film. Explores American and European film traditions. Major genres, authors and artists, and directing and production styles. Viewing of numerous films representative of various genres and directing styles.
COM-232	Advertising and Sales Promotion	Introduction to theory, practice, and techniques of advertising. Consideration of role of advertising and sales promotion. General survey of kinds and purposes of media, psychological implications of typical appeals, and limited practice in promotional programming. Coordination of advertising display and publicity in context of realistic sales promotion programs. Course is equated to BUS 232.
COM-260	Video Production for the Media	<strong>Prerequisites:</strong> COM 102
COM-270	Media Literacy	Emphasis on the ability to access, analyze and evaluate media in a variety of media formats.&nbsp; Review of tools necessary to understand the role of the media as well as skills of inquiry necessary for citizens of a democracy.&nbsp; Media formats examined include journalism, advertising and political communications.
COM-280	Applied Communication Practicum I	Practical application of mass media content production. Emphasizes production experience on official student publications or Public Relations projects.
COM-281	Applied Communication Practicum II	Practical application of mass media content production. Emphasizes production experience on official student publications or Public Relations projects.
COM-282	Applied Communication Practicum III	Practical application of mass media content production. Emphasizes production experience on official student publications or Public Relations projects.
COM-290	Topics in Mass Communication	Exploration of a topic selected by the department. Topics may include examination of mass communication in a variety of contexts: presidential elections, mass communication theory, mass communication effects, impact of the Internet, etc.
COM-296	Mass Communication Internship	Students placed in participatory position in mass media corporation or organization. Includes assignments related to internship.
CDM-103	Introduction to CAD Systems	Utilization of the latest version of AutoCAD to create, edit, and store introductory computer drawings. Involves draw and modify commands, layer creation, blocks, and dimensioning. Includes orthographic views, layouts, viewports, paper/model space, scaling, and lineweights. Basic design elements and drafting standards considerations are provided.
CDM-104	CAD Systems II	The latest version of AutoCAD is used to perform intermediate level CAD commands. Modifications of dimension properties and tolerancing are addressed. 3D modeling is introduced. Isometric, oblique, sectional, and auxiliary views are created. Multiple layouts, block editing, datalinked tables, external references (XREFs), attributes, concept hand sketching, and drafting symbols are covered.
CDM-120	Descriptive Geometry	Analysis of basic shapes with successive auxiliary view and rotations. Understanding of intersections, angles, and locations of multiple planes. Problem-solving of forces using vector geometry. Understanding of bearings and azimuths. Principle coverage regarding the revolutions of points, lines, planes, and solids. Construction of 6-view multiview perspectives.
CDM-205	Architectural Drafting I	Uses the latest version of AutoCAD Architecture to perform introductory construction techniques, foundation plans, and material requirements. Basic, standardized architectural practices are involved with floor plans, exterior elevations, and specific architectural layering.
CDM-206	Architectural Drafting II	Acquisition of intermediate level architectural drafting using the most recent version of AutoCAD Architecture. Understanding of site planning, load design elements, framing methods, alternative elevations, and beam sizing. Involves knowledge attainment of millwork and cabinet technology, rendering methods, and building codes.
CDM-207	Revit Architecture I	Learning of introductory elements of the latest version of Revit CAD software. Acquisition of Building Information Modeling (BIM) knowledge. Perspectives on shared user design utilized in commercial architecture. Perform drawing designs using Revit for floor plans, elevations, sections, and rendering. Perform building estimates and schedules, and construction document sets.
CDM-208	Revit Architecture II	Utilization of most recent version of Revit software to design a three story commercial project. Understanding of practices for commercial models, view, dimensions, families, and editing. Learning of landscaping, curbing, parking, and walkway design. 3D design incorporation of foundation setting, beams, and footings. Creating of custom stairs and railings. Comprehension of intermediate level BIM practices.&nbsp;
CDM-209	Construction Materials	Knowledge/comprehension course involving building materials properties and structures. understanding of steel, aluminum, and concrete production/testing. Knowledge acquisition of asphalt methods and wood properties. Composite material properties (including microscopic) are covered. No computer work is involved in this class, but knowledge applies to many civil and architectural design applications.
CDM-210	HVAC Drafting	Utilizes the latest AutoCAD software to draw HVAC designs, schedules, and reference data. Knowledge acquisition of relevant HVAC scientific elements- including heat, thermodynamics, and combustion. Course topics include heating and air conditioning systems/designs.
CDM-211	Structural Drafting	Perform structural shop drawings using the most current version of AutoCAD. Achieve conceptual understanding of structural design and economic considerations. Acquire understanding of steel grades and shapes. learn framing elements, and use critical tables and reference materials for structural designs.
CDM-212	Electrical/Electronic Drafting	Uses the latest version of AutoCAD Electrical to draw schematics, logic diagrams, and wire diagrams. Acquire understanding of electronics symbols, components, and references. Apply elements into CAD designs with circuit boards, wiring, and cabling. Use electrical drafting layers on a building floor plan.
CDM-221	Solid Modeling I	Uses the current version of SolidWorks software to provide introductory 3D design elements. Applications are involved with basic part modeling, 3D dimensioning, assembly models and operations, introductory molds, and sheet metal parts. Vector problem-solving for 3D application is performed. The product development cycle is covered.
CDM-222	Solid Modeling II	Uses the current version of SolidWorks software for intermediate 3D modeling. Utilizes sketch tools for entities, parametric modeling, and design tables. Assembly and multiple configuration drawings are performed. Mold, sheet metal, surface, and weld designs are covered. Course items include mass properties, dimensioning, and reference geometry. Students have an opportunity to take the Certified SolidWorks Associate Exam in this class.
CDM-223	Geometric Dimensioning/Tolerance	Uses the latest AutoCAD version to apply advanced dimensioning and tolerancing. Understanding of drafting symbols, tolerance calculations, datums, material conditions, and material boundaries. Application of form, orientation, and location tolerances. Understanding of profile and runout tolerances.
CDM-227	Revit MEP	Teach concepts, principles, and applications of 3D parametric models and computer designs using Autodesk Revit software. Create, document and print mechanical, electrical, and plumbing (MEP) components in shared (multiuser) model structure. Provide applications relevant to construction, architecture, industry, and engineering.
CDM-231	Tool Path Generation	Includes short history of N/C programming, cutters, speeds and feeds, sequence of operations, tool path generation for 3-axis and multiaxis machines, tooling and machine language using Mastercam program and completion of prototypes in CNC manufacturing cell.
CDM-235	Manufacturing Processes	Focuses on processes used in manufacturing metal parts. Includes machining, stamping, extruding, swaging, grinding, casting, forging, roll forming, welding, electrical discharge machining (EDM) and threading. Finishing processes include anodizing, tempering, annealing, pickling, etc. Addresses overall process of manufacturing planning. Prerequisite waived with instructor consent.
CDM-251	Introduction to Piping Drafting	Draw piping schematics, plan views, elevations, spooling, notes, fittings, and charts using the latest version of AutoCAD. Obtain knowledge of piping processes, drafting practices, and flow diagrams. Acquire learning of piping equipment considerations (flanges, sections, fittings, valves, pumps, and vessels). Utilize math related to piping designs.
CDM-255	Civil Drafting	Utilizes the latest version of AutoCAD Civil 3D software. Demonstrate basic civil technical information, including topographic mapping, profiles/contours, highway plans, roadway/subdivision layouts, site grading, and sewer designs. Demonstrate survey point, and surface layouts. Complete roadway alignments, profiles, assemblies, and corridors. Process terrain data.
CDM-265	Sustainable Design	Use the latest version of AutoCAD to assemble a portfolio of sustainable design work. Acquire knowledge about sustainability issues and green construction. Obtain knowledge about LEED standards and certification. Review current trends in sustainable construction methods, energy, water, and waste as related to residential and commercial construction. Achieve learning about sustainable building materials, water use, and energy storage. Complete a project that converts an existing commercial structure for LEED certification.
CDM-270	Externship	Involves obtaining credit for workplace learning of computer-aided drafting practices, methods, and applications. Must have an existing or pending CAD learning employment situation before seeking approval by the CAD Program Coordinator. Course involves validation of workplace learning and a documented report of learning experiences.
CDM-298	CAD/CAM Capstone	Enrollment can occur during the last semester of study for a Certificate of Achievement, or during the last or next-to-last semester for an Associates Degree. Class involves meetings to organize materials and planning for employment (or future advancement) interaction with SCC Career Services Dept. is included. A portfolio of coursework drawing designs, sketches, and other drafting work is developed. Standardized assessments, including Missouri and National drafting standards, are performed.
CPT-103	Microcomputer Applications	Introduces use of business applications in word processing, spreadsheets, databases, and presentations. Windows application package used for each application. (PC-based software only) &nbsp; Keyboarding skills recommended. (Students may not receive credit for both BAS 103 and CPT 103.)
CPT-104	Introduction to Programming for Animation and Computer Games	The course examines the proper steps in the creation of animation and game design. It covers history of gaming, game genre, story and character development, and game management. The creation of simple games will also be examined using the GameMaker development tool.
CPT-105	Ethics in Technology	Introductory survey of classical and contemporary ethical theories related to technology use today and problems with an emphasis on case studies and examples. Course fulfills AA general education requirements. (formerly CPB 105)&nbsp;Students may not receive credit for both BUS 105 and CPT 105.&nbsp;
CPT-106	Operating Systems	Introduction to the concepts of computer operating systems, including DOS, Linux and Windows 7. Covers the three types of interfaces: command line, menu, and graphical. Operating concepts of file, disk, and other resource management.
CPT-115	Introduction to Data Processing	Introduction to computer systems with topics that include system components, data storage techniques, binary arithmetic, operating systems, device characteristics and programming. Course fulfills AA general education requirements.
CPT-121	Basics of Data Communications	Understanding and appreciation of data communications from user's perspective. Overview of data communications concepts to address data communications issues in contemporary home or business environment. Online only (formerly CPC 120).
CPT-125	Introduction to Project Management	This course will introduce the students to the basic principles of Project Management. The students will be taught five of the ten Knowledge Areas of the Project Management Book of Knowledge (PMBOK).
CPT-130	Introduction to UNIX Operating System	Introduction to UNIX operating system. Covers essential components of operating system, concept of shell, and basic editing techniques. Includes file structures, file access, linking files, and script files.
CPT-135	Programming in Python	Learning good problem-solving techniques using the Python programming language. Object-oriented concepts are included.
CPT-160	Mobile Apps Development	Developing applications for mobile devices on various platforms.
CPT-165	Computer Programming Logic	Understanding and appreciation of computer problem solving methods. Applies knowledge of specific characteristics of computer language and coding mechanics to logical solution of given problem. Logic and programming techniques apply to any of machine-oriented or high-level languages currently available.
CPT-172	FORTRAN Programming	Continues development of good programming style using FORTRAN language. Emphasis is on development and use of single and multi-dimensional arrays and on development and use of subroutines and functions.
CPT-174	COBOL Programming I	General orientation to concept of structured COBOL programming and the use of COBOL language features and programming techniques. Taught on IBM-compatible PC.
CPT-175	COBOL Programming II	Continuation of COBOL Programming I. Introduces programs of increased complexity, using advanced features of COBOL language, including sorts, indexed files, and subroutines. Taught on IBM-compatible PC.
CPT-181	SQL Basics	Extensive hands-on activities using in-class SQL-based relational database to transform request into SQL query. How to create and test increasingly complex queries, how to build tables using data definition capabilities of SQL, how to create views for querying and manipulating data, and how to index in SQL database (formerly CPB 240).&nbsp; <em>Fall</em>
CPT-182	Beginning Programming in C++	Working knowledge of object-oriented programming using C++ language. Features extensive hands-on programming development using C++ compiler on IBM-compatible system.
CPT-185	Programming in C#	Object-oriented approach to programming as well as the C# programming language.
CPT-187	Visual Basic.NET	Using Visual Basic.NET, design effective user interfaces using appropriate controls, properties and coding.
CPT-189	Java Programming	This class will provide students with the opportunity to master basic fundamentals of the Java programming language, to understand Object Oriented Design (OOD) and Object Oriented Analysis (OOA).
CPT-198	Computer Science Internship	Requires prior approval of department chair or dean. Students placed in a position in business to gain practical experience and learn specific operational technologies.
CPT-200	Systems Analysis and Design	Orientation to the development of computer-based man-machine information systems. Study of system life cycles, development of logical systems specification, data collection techniques, human factors design and standards for documentation.
CPT-201	Introduction to Database Management	Practical foundation for the design, implementation and management of database systems. Includes the Internet's impact on how databases are designed, implemented and used (formerly CPB 201).
CPT-204	Advanced Applications	Continuation of topics covered in elementary applications course. Emphasis on spreadsheet macros, functions, graphics, and database form development, modeling, and merging features using word processor (formerly CPB 101).
CPT-220	Data Integration Techniques	Creation and use of custom menus, forms, and other features in spreadsheet and database environments, and use of logic structures, control loops and other branching techniques. Emphasis on handling data by defining properties and by creating value trees, event trees, and data links to external data files (formerly CPB 220).
CPT-225	Advanced Topics in Project Management	This course is an extension of the CPT-125 Introduction to Project Management and will introduce the students to more advanced concepts. The students will be introduced to the remaining five of the ten Knowledge Areas of the Project Management Book of Knowledge (PMBOK). The students will also run a simulated project.
CPT-230	Advanced UNIX	In-depth look at UNIX operating system and how it works. Advanced file access and programming in shell. Covers basic system administration and close look at security administration (formerly CPC 230).
CPT-243	Intranets and E-Commerce	Definition of E-Commerce, Intranets and Extranets. Exploration of major business opportunities, limitations, issues, and risks of all these technologies as well as how they are conducted and managed (formerly CPC 220). Online only.
CPT-245	Telephony	Coverage of signaling protocols used in telephony and the convergence of the telephone network with data networks (formerly CPC 280). Online only.
CPT-246	Computer Security	Exploration of LAN and WAN network security issues and various resolutions to the problems (formerly CPC 282). Online only.
CPT-249	Network Architecture and Protocol	Terminology, operating systems, network topology, computer network architecture and hardware, and introduction to network protocols. Protocols covered include block-oriented send and wait protocols and streaming protocols. Includes introduction to Internet working protocols (formerly CPC 200). Online only.
CPT-250	Database Programming	Special topics course about how to program in a commercially popular database language and integrating databases for the Web.
CPT-260	Oracle Programming	In-depth coverage of Oracle's current Programming Language/ Structured Query Language (PL/SQL) bringing all benefits and capabilities of a high-level programming language to the database environment.
CPT-265	DB2 Programming	Production of application programs manipulating DB2 databases in a UNIX, Windows NT, Windows 95, or OS/2 environment. Emphasis on embedding static SQL statements and preparing programs for execution.
CPT-271	Programming in Perl	Quick prototyping, systems utilities, software tools, database access and www programming. Perl modules and extensions greatly reduce development time for any given task. Perl scripting included. Role of Perl in bioinformatics.
CPT-281	Advanced Programming in C++	Advanced programming topics using the C<strong>++</strong> language. Emphasis on data structures and file handling.
CPT-282	Advanced Visual Basic.NET	Advanced Visual Basic.NET topics include object-oriented programming, database integration, functions, and procedures.
CPT-287	Advanced Java Programming	This class will provide students with the opportunity to master advanced programming techniques using Java programming language, to obtain a higher level understanding of Object Oriented Design (OOD), and Object Oriented Analysis (OOA).
CPM-120	Windows Multimedia	Use of Windows operating system to present multimedia applications and theory to create kiosks, DVDs, presentations and Web pages with text, graphics, sound, video and animations. Emphasis on windows multimedia techniques such as application software integration, embedding sounds, graphics and videos, working with different file formats and resolutions, sound and video capture, and using various editing software for different multimedia applications. Computer literacy recommended.
CPM-160	Introduction to HTML	Creation of Web pages using HTML scripting covering tags, frames, tables, hypertext, graphics, sound and gif animations. Advanced topics include Cascading Style Sheets and new areas of HTML. Computer literacy recommended.
CPM-170	Computer Graphics	Introduction to computer graphics software to create multimedia and presentation graphics. Emphasis on use of tools and menus to create special effects and to scale, stretch, rotate, group, and layer graphics.
CPM-190	Dynamic Programming Languages	Introduction to tools and skills required to build and maintain WWW server sites, using a variety of languages. Online only.
CPM-200	XML	Creation of Web pages using XML (eXtensible Markup Language) documents including Internal and External Document Type Definitions, creation of XML schemas, creating XML namespaces for use with two different schemas, and using data types to define specific attributes and elements as well as the extraction of the XML data into other programs. Online only.
CPM-210	Digital Photo Editing	Edit and enhance digital photos with special techniques and tools using popular software. Prepare photos, backgrounds, and buttons for Web pages; restore old photos and create photo composites.
CPM-220	3D Animation	Creation of 2-3 dimensional animation and its playback as part of multimedia demonstration. Concepts and tools involved in computer animation and graphics.
CPM-230	Social Media Marketing	Examines how to develop an effective strategy for communicating to a targeted audience using the accelerated tools available in an online market. Will touch on the use of Social Media, Email Marketing, Blogging, SEO and PPC advertisements to create engagement. It will also cover the use of Google Analytics to track performance.
CPM-240	Web Design	Introduction to Web editors and techniques used to design Web pages. Developed concepts include frames, tables, cascading style sheets, embedding java script code, and database integration. Emphasis on principles of good Web design and navigation.
CPM-250	Web Animation	Design and integration of graphics, text, and audio sources to create animations and Web pages for the Internet. Utilization of current Web application software.
CPM-260	Content Management Systems	Focus on Web-based content management systems that provide website authoring, collaboration and administration tools to create and manage website content for users with little knowledge of Web programming or markup languages.
CPM-270	Digital Video Editing	Hardware and software tools to capture audio, still, and full-motion video including scanners and video capture boards. Covers techniques used to edit and play captured audio/video. Discussion of data compression methods.
CPM-280	Javascript	Writing script through use of Javascript programming language to create interactivity and animation for Web pages. Online only.
CPM-290	Topics in Multimedia	Appropriate prerequisite course(s); Instructor's permission required. Independent in-depth study on multimedia topics or software. Topics can include Advanced PhotoShop, Advanced Illustrator, cartoon and game animation using Flash, Using Lingo With Director or Authorware incorporating a series of software packages to be presented within a portfolio.
CPM-295	Beyond HTML/Portfolios	Beyond basic Web design, course focuses on responsive design (design for mobile devices), search engine optimization, analytics and implementing jQuery. Students will create a Web-based portfolio and utilize project management tools.
CPC-107	IT Technical Support	Preparation to meet the requirements of the CompTIA A+ certification exam. How to build, configure, upgrade and troubleshoot PCs and mobile devices. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions and hands-on labs.
CPC-125	Windows Desktop Operating Systems	In-depth introduction to current Windows desktop operating systems including installation, resource use, hardware devices and drivers, system performance and reliability, network protocols and services, desktop, security and troubleshooting. Emphasis on supporting end users. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions and hands-on labs. Preparation for Microsoft certification.
CPC-155	Programming for System Administrators	Introduction and survey of modern programming and scripting languages with an orientation towards cyber security needs. Offered in an online or hybrid format only.
CPC-160	Security Fundamentals	Fundamentals of security and preparation&nbsp;for the CompTIA Security + certification exam. &nbsp;Combination of hands-on labs, lectures and demonstrations.
CPC-161	Computer Forensics	Explore use of analytical and investigative techniques to identify, collect, examine and preserve evidence or electronically stored information. Combination of hands-on labs, lectures and demonstrations.
CPC-162	Ethical Hacking	Determine weaknesses and vulnerabilities in target systems using the same tools and knowledge as a malicious hacker (in a lawful way) in order to increase security. Preparation for CEH certification. Combination of hand-on labs, lectures and demonstrations.
CPC-170	CCNA1	First course in a four-course sequence that prepares student for Cisco Certified Network Administrator (CCNA) certification and the job market. Over the four-course sequence learn networking fundamentals, routing and switching protocols, router and switch configuration in the LAN and WAN, security issues and solutions, and wireless technologies. Combination of hands-on labs, lectures, and demonstrations.
CPC-171	CCNA2	Second course in a four-course sequence that prepares student for Cisco Certified Network Administrator (CCNA) certification and the job market. Over the four-course sequence learn networking fundamentals, routing and switching protocols, router and switch configuration in the LAN and WAN, security issues and solutions, and wireless technologies. Combination of hands-on labs, lectures, and demonstrations.
CPC-172	CCNA3	Third course in a four-course sequence that prepares student for Cisco Certified Network Administrator (CCNA) certification and the job market. Over the four-course sequence learn networking fundamentals, routing and switching protocols, router and switch configuration in the LAN and WAN, security issues and solutions, and wireless technologies. Combination of hands-on labs, lectures, and demonstrations.
CPC-173	CCNA4	Fourth course in a four-course sequence that prepares student for Cisco Certified Network Administrator (CCNA) certification and the job market. Over the four-course sequence learn networking fundamentals, routing and switching protocols, router and switch configuration in the LAN and WAN, security issues and solutions, and wireless technologies. Combination of hands-on labs, lectures, and demonstrations.
CPC-180	Introduction to Linux	Introduction to Linux, installation, users and groups, package management, permissions and general network configuration. This is one of two classes required to prepare for the Red Hat Certified System Administrator certification. &nbsp;Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions and hands-on labs.
CPC-202	Windows Server and Active Directory	In-depth study of the latest Windows Server operating system including installation, managing a server environment, access to resources, disaster recovery, IP addressing, name resolution, routing and remote access and network security. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions and hands-on labs. Preparation for Microsoft certifications.
CPC-224	Microsoft SQL Server	Preparation to meet certification requirements to become Microsoft Certified Professional (MCP) or Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer (MCSE). How to design and implement database solution using Microsoft SQL Server. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions, online assignments, and hands-on labs.
CPC-225	Microsoft Exchange Server	Preparation to meet certification requirements to become Microsoft Certified Professional (MCP) or Microsoft Certified Systems A. How to implement, administer, and troubleshoot information systems that incorporate Microsoft Exchange Server. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions, online assignments, and hands-on labs.
CPC-240	Wireless LANs	Introduction to Wireless LANs. Topics include IEEE 802.11 standard, wireless radio technology, wireless topologies, access points, bridges, antennas, security, site survey preparation, troubleshooting, and emerging technologies. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions, online assignments, and hands-on labs.
CPC-245	CCNA Security	In-depth introduction to network security based on router firewalls and security appliances. Topics include Access Control Lists (ACLs), AAA security, intrusion detection, monitoring, and securing Virtual Private Networks (VPNs). Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions, online assignments, and hands-on labs. Preparation for security-related industry certifications.
CPC-246	Network Security II	Second course in a series of security classes providing in-depth study of network security based on firewall security devices. Topics include router and security appliance ACLs, AAA, advanced protocols and intrusion detection, failover and system maintenance, VPNs, and device management. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions, online assignments, and hands-on labs. Preparation for security-related industry certifications.
CPC-247	Voice Over IP	Introduction to Voice over IP including a discussion of converged networks, gateways and trunks, and call management. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions, and hands-on labs.
CPC-260	Linux Administration	Learn what a Linux administrator needs to know to support a Linux server.&nbsp; Includes DNS, DHCP, mail services, Web and SQL services, file and print sharing, backup and recovery, monitoring and optimization, and configuration management. This is the second of two classes required to prepare for the Red Hat Certified System Administrator certification. Combination of lectures, demonstrations, discussions and hands-on labs.
CPC-270	CCNP1	First course in a series that prepares students for CCNP cerrtification.&nbsp; Reference Cisco System's Web site (www.cisco.com/certification) for specific competencies addressed.&nbsp; Combination of hands-on labs, lectures and demonstrations.
CPC-271	CCNP2	Second course in a series that prepares students for CCNP certification.&nbsp; Reference Cisco System's Web site (www.cisco.com/certification) for specific competencies addressed.&nbsp; Combination of hands-on-labs, lectures and demonstrations.
CPC-272	CCNP3	Third course in a series that prepares students for CCNP certification.&nbsp; Reference Cisco System's Web site (www.cisco.com/certification) for specific competencies addressed.&nbsp; Combination of hands-on labs, lectures and demonstrations.
CPC-273	CCNP4	Fourth course in a series that prepares students for CCNP certification.&nbsp; Reference Cisco System's Web site (www.cisco.com/certification) for specific competencies addressed.&nbsp; Combination of hands-on labs, lectures and demonstrations.
CPC-290	Virtualization Technologies	Introduction to virtualization technologies and use in current corporate environments.&nbsp; Heavy emphasis on VMware and other products like Hyper V.&nbsp; Combination of lectures, demonstrations and hands-on labs.
CPC-299	New Technologies	Advanced IT topics including current trends and important skill sets.&nbsp; Combination of lectures, demonstrations and hand-on labs when appropriate.
CRJ-101	Introduction to Victimology	Introduces psychological impact incurred by crime victims. Basic crisis intervention techniques, working with and understanding special populations of victims and their needs, i.e. family violence, sexual assault victims, child victims, homicide survivors and response of criminal justice system, current laws and review of history of victim movement. Fall.
CRJ-103	Addictive Disease Concepts	Explores addiction from historical and theoretical background to current concepts. Variety of addictive behaviors examined with special focus on psychoactive drug dependency.&nbsp; Fall.
CRJ-104	Treatment:  Alcohol and Drug Abuse	Focus on treatment of alcohol and drug abuse as a continuum of processes from intervention through rehabilitation. Incorporates ways to address needs of people suffering from alcohol and drug abuse.&nbsp; Spring.
CRJ-110	Criminal Investigations	Introductory perspective on the tactics, strategies, and techniques of criminal investigations.
CRJ-140	Introduction to Criminal Justice System	Overview of criminal justice system, including historical development, present status, and suggested reforms. Includes detailed descriptions of duties and functions of specific actors in system, including victim, offender, police, prosecuting and defense attorneys, courts and corrections.
CRJ-165	Introduction to Security	Survey of security systems and techniques, security surveys, and economic factors related to security.
CRJ-170	Criminal Law and Procedure	Analysis of substantive criminal law and criminal procedure. Specific attention given to Missouri Criminal Code and cases that interpret Missouri laws.&nbsp; Fall.
CRJ-171	Rules of Criminal Evidence	Basic rules of evidence applicable to criminal and other related police duties. Examines fundamental questions of evidence and theories of proof, including hearsay, documentary proof, self-incrimination, relevance, and presumptions. Spring.
CRJ-175	Criminology	Study of various explanations of crime: classical psychological, sociological, critical, and interactionist. Examines array of responses available to system, including punishment by incarceration and other alternatives.
CRJ-201	Criminal Justice: Politics and Policy	Examination of the conflicting and converging needs and skills of social roles necessary for sound criminal justice system in society. Objectives, activities and skills of citizen, criminal justice professional, and social scientist identified and analyzed.&nbsp; Spring.
CRJ-202	Correctional Institutions	Detailed examination of American correctional institutions, including roles of detainees or inmates, correctional officers, and administration. Topics include classification schemes, prison life and violence, and conflict between custody and treatment functions of institution.
CRJ-205	Juvenile Justice Systems	Examines justification for juvenile court system and looks at organization, functions, and jurisdiction of juvenile agencies. Specific attention given to Missouri juvenile system and court cases interpreting these laws.
CRJ-210	Crime Victimization:  Policies and Procedures	Concepts, dynamics, and policies of programs for victims of crime, including their historical development, techniques for intervention, and response of criminal justice system. Model victim witness programs evaluated for strengths, weaknesses, and needed changes. Spring.
CRJ-224	Constitutional Law	Examines United States Constitution and relationship to American Society as a whole and criminal justice system in particular.&nbsp; Fall.
CRJ-230	Crisis Intervention	Introduction to theories and practices related to intervening and mediating in and defusing crises, and referral of people in crises.&nbsp; Spring.
CRJ-240	Probation and Parole	Historical development, relative merits and disadvantages of these programs, and analysis of their success as applied in all types of probational systems. Spring.
CRJ-250	Police Administration	Analyzes organization and administration of police departments and systems, highlighting peculiar characteristics of police organizations and personnel, budgeting for police departments, control and responsibility of police departments and relation of police department to other public agencies and general principles of public administration. Fall.
CRJ-260	Police-Community Relations	Studies development of police-community relations units, analyzes current police-community relations programs in large cities, and engages in hands-on development and observation of programs in action. General Education Skills Assessment is embedded. Spring.
CRJ-265	Internship	Students placed in participative position in criminal justice agency.
CRJ-266	Internship II	Students enroll in Criminal Justice Practicum a second time.
CRJ-280	Comparative Criminology and Criminal Justice	Analysis of criminal justice systems and crime in other cultures and how other cultures define and respond to criminal behavior.
CRJ-290	Special Topics in Criminal Justice	Credit for individual study or selected classes in subjects such as role of women in the criminal justice system, poverty and crime, or police civil liability. Instructor's approval required.
CRJ-291	Mock Trial	Clarifies working roles in legal establishment. Students portray each of courtroom principals: judge, prosecutor, defense attorney, defendant, and juror. Study hypothetical case through research and work with attorney instructors in courtroom setting. Procedures and working knowledge of judicial system.&nbsp; Fall.
CRJ-292	Mock Trial Competition	Students compete in American Mock Trial Association Regional Tournament.&nbsp; Spring.
CRJ-298	Criminal Justice Capstone	Culminating experience integrating Criminal Justice Associate of Applied Science program course work.&nbsp; Required for Criminal Justice AAS degree-seeking students in the final semester before graduation.
DC-299	Diversity Portfolio	For students who completed a semester study-abroad program or four courses denoted as diversity courses (as one of three choices for the second part of the certificate). Students will work with the Academic Diversity Initiatives Lead in an independent study. Student will write a paper/response about diversity from three scholarly articles, a film, book, or speech/festival, event or performance that explores diversity.
ECO-100	Survey Economics	Introduction to basic economic decision-making at both micro and macro levels. Overview of topics relating to aggregate economic activity and to individual economic activity of households and firms.
ECO-110	Principles of Macroeconomics	Introduction to determination of aggregate measures of economic activity, price level, employment and national output. Topics include inflation, unemployment and economic growth; money and banking system; and formulation of fiscal and monetary policies in pursuit of economic stabilization.
ECO-120	Principles of Microeconomics	Introduction to determination of prices in product and factor markets. Topics include individual decision-making behavior of households and firms; interactions in markets of varying degrees of competition; and effects of such markets on allocation of scarce resources and distribution of income.
ECO-220	Money and Banking	Examination of nature of money and factors influencing money stock; introduction to monetary theory and policy; and impact of monetary phenomena on employment, production, prices and balance of payments.
EDU-125	Teaching Literacy Through Storytelling	Learn to communicate through the magic of storytelling. An auditory form of learning that can enhance curricula.
EDU-201	Cognitive Activities and STEM for Young Children	Focus on developmentally appropriate methods and materials to enhance young children's awareness of science, technology, engineering and math concepts. Emphasizes techniques to develop observation, problem solving and thinking skills. Site observations are a part of the course work. Students may not receive credit for both EDU 201 and CDC 201.
EDU-202	Creative Activities and Play for Young Children	Introduces techniques and materials to foster creativity, imagination and artistic expression. It investigates the role of play in children's development. Examines teacher's role in planning and implementing process-oriented activities. Site observations are a part of the course work. Students may not receive credit for both EDU 202 and CDC 102.
EDU-204	Principles of Early Childhood Education	Investigates theory and practice of early childhood education in variety of program settings. Includes survey of program models, teaching techniques, curriculum planning and scheduling, and classroom management. Site observations are a part of the course work. Students may not receive credit for both EDU 204 and CDC 104.
EDU-205	Children, Families and Communities	Overviews interrelationships between children, families and society. Highlights topics of home/school, communication and involvement, community resources and societal influences such as violence and divorce. Students cannot receive credit for both CDC 205 and EDU 205.
EDU-207	Introduction to Young Children with Special Needs	Introduces characteristics of individuals with exceptionalities and overviews history and educational theories related to individuals with exceptionalities, especially children. Examines impact of disabilities and other special needs on individuals, families, schools and communities. Site observations are a part of the course work. Students cannot receive credit for both EDU 207 and CDC 107.
EDU-208	Nutrition, Health and Safety of Children	Examines nutrition, health and safety factors affecting children from birth through adolescence. Topics include dietary requirements and nutrition education, health assessment, childhood illnesses and immunizations, first aid, accident prevention and child abuse recognition and intervention. Students may not receive credit for both EDU 208 and CDC 208.
EDU-211	Foundations of Education	Examination of the historical, philosophical, sociological, political, economic, and legal foundations of the American public education system.  Nature of school environments, design, and organization of school curricula and characteristics of effective schools and instruction in grades P-12 will be explored. Educational structures, practices, and projections for the future will be studied.
EDU-212	Foundation of Education in a Diverse Society	Examine educational practice from diverse historical, philosophical, sociological, economic, and legal perspectives, Emphasis will be on educational equity, sociocultural influences on teaching and learning, and how teachers and schools can contribute to interpersonal and intercultural understanding and respect, social justice and democratic citizenship. Explore the nature of school environments, the fundamental goals of education in the American public school, English Language Learners, the relationship between school and diverse society, the organization of school curricula, and characteristics of effective schools and instruction in grades P-12.
EDU-220	Technology for Teachers	Focus on integration of instructional technology into the P-12 classrooms. Variety of software programs, presentation technology and telecommunication tools. Concentration on social, ethical, legal and human issues surrounding the use of technology. Course fulfills A.A. general education requirement for computer literacy.
EDU-222	Educational Technology	Learn how to integrate instructional technology into P-12 classrooms, through a variety of software programs, presentation technology, telecommunication tools, and assistive technology. Focus will also be on social, ethical, legal, and human issues surrounding the use of technology.
EDU-225	Literature for Children	Study of children's literature from preschool to eighth grade, with best forms of literature for children and to develop standards of judgment in selection of reading materials for children. Recommended for elementary education majors.
EDU-240	Educational Psychology	Relation of psychological principles to teaching, learning, and assessment, and the educational practice in P-12 classrooms. Focusing on the learner and the learning process, teacher characteristics, and classroom processes that increase student motivation. Student diversity and appropriate instructional strategies for students with special needs will also be introduced.
EDU-242	Art for Children	Experience in teaching techniques of various appropriate media of visual arts and uses in elementary and middle school curricula.
EDU-244	Physical Education for Elementary Grades	For education majors. Understanding of child's total development with special emphasis on physical motor development. Overview of play, movement activities, teaching techniques, discipline, and working with individual differences.
EDU-245	Integrating Movement and the Arts in Elementary Education	Provides methods for pre-service teachers to integrate movement and the arts (physical and kinesthetic activity as well as literary) and fine arts into traditional classroom disciplines (communication arts, math, science and social studies).
EDU-246	Music for Children	For elementary education majors with no previous musical training. Introduction to methods to teach music through singing, playing the piano and other simple instruments, and rhythmic response to music. Emphasizes creative nature of music, with introduction to materials functional in classroom setting.
EDU-247	Multicultural Education	Examines the multicultural context of education and prepare students to understand and teach learners from diverse backgrounds, with diverse characteristics, and with differing social identities. The course will address issues of educational equity, sociocultural influences on teaching and learning, and how teachers and schools can contribute to interpersonal and intercultural understanding and respect, social justice, and democratic citizenship.
EDU-250	Education of Exceptional Learners	Introduction to exceptional learners and their education in grades P-12. Knowledge, skills and dispositions that will enable students to work effectively with exceptional learners in general education or special education will be covered.
EDU-252	Autism Spectrum Disorders	Focuses on a broad overview of autism spectrum disorders with particular emphasis on characteristics, definition, educational aspects and contemporary issues in the field of special education. It is designed to provide students with a firm grounding in the foundations of teaching persons with autism, methods to enhance classroom functioning and skill acquisition and expose them to recent developments in the field. Special emphasis will be given to selecting evidence-based practices and enhancing collaboration among individuals with ASD, their families and supporting professionals.
EDU-255	Social Communication and Sensory Integration	Provides students with an overview of the components of communication and issues and strategies to increase an individual's communication abilities, with emphasis on visual aspects of language. Sensory systems, sensory processing and sensory motor development and the implications of sensory processing when working with students with autism spectrum disorders. It will include emphasis on strategies for team building, planning, data-based decision making and evaluation.
EDU-280	Practicum for Paraprofessionals	Culminating course for the A.A.S. for Paraprofessionals. Observation and participation in local P-12 classrooms. Investigation and discussion will relate to the profession. Students must be available to participate in local classrooms during the P-12 school day.
EDU-285	Teaching Profession with Field Experience	This course has been designed to acquaint students with the day-to-day realities of classroom life and expose them to various professional and instructional issues in order to provide a realistic understanding of the teaching profession. The SCC student will perform a variety of activities such as: providing small group instruction, tutoring individuals, assisting students with assignments, providing whole class instruction, proctoring exams, and more while under the guidance of a Pre-K-12th grade classroom teacher. Furthermore, the course instructor from SCC observe our students in action as he/she is fulfilling their practicum experience in community classrooms.
EDU-290	Portfolio Assessment in Education	Compilation by pre-service teachers of portfolios of observations, descriptions, and reflections upon their studies in professional education as required by the Missouri Department of Elementary and Secondary Education mid-preparation benchmarks of the MoSPE/MIPEC&nbsp;standards. Portfolios will be presented to the four-year school to which the student transfers, and copies will be retained by the Education program as assessment evidence for accrediting bodies.
ETC-101	Fundamentals of Electronics	Introductory course in electricity and electronics. Topics include a study of resistors, Ohm?s law, series and parallel circuits, voltage and current dividers, DC meters, Kirchoff?s laws, conductors and insulators, and capacitors. Emphasis is on direct current circuitry and troubleshooting. Course includes lecture material and laboratory practice. A basic understanding of algebra is necessary.
EGR-100	Introduction to Engineering	Introduction to the profession of engineering within the scope of overall technical occupations. &nbsp;Course includes resources for major exploration (incorporating regional professional societies, guest seminars, and university transfer information). &nbsp;Emphasis is placed on emerging trends in field practice (globalization, computerization, nanotechnology, renewable energy, bio engineering, and contract engineering). &nbsp;Content focuses on distinguishing aspects of practice (advanced math/science application, planning, analysis, communication) critical to the profession.
EGR-104	Engineering Design	Introduction to technical project management involving team activities with project planning, physical design with CAD, data analysis, and communication. &nbsp;Planning topics covered include project scoping, scheduling, budgeting, decision analysis, and risk reduction. &nbsp;Data analysis includes basic charting/ statistics, data interpretation, and measurement &nbsp;science. &nbsp;Communication learning involves novel methods for effectiveness both with technical and non-technical audiences. &nbsp;A team project is involved necessitating significant team member interaction outside of class. &nbsp;AutoCAD, Excel, Word, and PowerPoint are learned and utilized.&nbsp;
EGR-170	Engineering Mechanics I-Statics	Application of principles of mechanics to engineering problems of equilibrium. Includes resultants, equilibrium, friction, trusses, center of gravity and moment of inertia.
EGR-210	Engineering Mechanics II-Dynamics	Application of principles of mechanics to engineering problems of motion and acceleration. Topics include plane motion; force, mass and acceleration; work and energy; and impulse and momentum.
EGR-220	Electrical Circuits	Application of advanced mathematics (calculus and differential equations) to the understanding of circuits and circuit elements. &nbsp;Topics include network components and properties, node voltages and mesh currents, signal models, first order circuits, and second order circuits. &nbsp;The final exam will be administered via the Missouri University of Science and Technology.&nbsp;
EGR-221	Electrical Circuits I Laboratory	Laboratory to accompany Electrical Circuits I.
EGR-296	Engineering Internship	Participatory position placement in a local engineering firm. May require specialized training. Requires reflective paper on the experience. 12 credits in A.S. Pre-Engineering Program is required.
ENG-095	Developmental Writing I	Remediates basic writing weaknesses such as basic grammar and sentence structure. Focus on construction of developed paragraphs. Course is ungraded and may be repeated.
ENG-096	Developmental Writing II	Pre-college-level writing class focusing on basic writing skills. Includes review of sentence structure, grammar, punctuation, and paragraph structure. May require assignments in ACE Center. Course does not count toward most degrees. Some sections offered as ESL friendly, i.e. taught by instructor trained to work with students for whom English is not primary language. Course grade on pass (P), repeat (R), or fail (F) basis.
ENG-101	English Composition I	College-level writing course required for all other college-level writing classes. Emphasizes essay structure, ways of organizing information, and use of sources. Basic research skills and critical thinking skills as integral part of course.
ENG-102	English Composition II	Advanced college-level writing course emphasizing analysis and in-depth research. Critical reading and thinking skills as well as library skills are integral part of course.
ENG-115	Technical Writing	Required course for some technical programs. Writing skills applied to technical reports and summaries. Emphasizes special language, information, and audience demands of technical subjects and audiences. Students must receive a minimum grade of ?C? in ENG 101 to register for course.
ENG-125	Business Writing	Required course for some business majors. Writing skills applied to various types of business communications including business correspondence. Emphasis on demands of special audiences and types of communications.
ENG-200	Book Writing Workshop	Student should have excellent writing skills and be proficient in the English language. Skills and methods required to professionally write a fiction or nonfiction book. Students will complete the framework and a minimum of three chapters for possible submission to a publisher.
ENG-201	Introduction to Creative Writing	Exploration of various forms and processes of creative writing.
ENG-202	Creative Writing II	A continuation of Creative Writing I with a focus on publication of works through both a review of submission procedures for periodical publications and publishers and production of a literary magazine. Writing for this class will be interpretive in nature.
ENG-203	Self-Publishing Workshop	From manuscript preparation to media marketing, presentation of how to publish books for bookstore shelves or for family history. Guest speakers enhance course with expertise in industry. Instructor is published professional writer.
ENG-206	Fiction Writing	Advanced creative writing with emphasis on guided editing and revision of narrative forms including essay, fiction, and creative non-fiction.
ENG-207	Poetry Writing	Advanced poetry writing with emphasis on open discussion of student work and individualized critique by instructor and peers.
ENG-208	Writing for Stage and Screen	Advanced drama and screenplay writing with emphasis on open discussion of student work and individualized critique by instructor and peers. Additional emphasis on formatting and industry expectations.
ENG-209	Writing Creative Nonfiction	Advanced writing of various forms of creative nonfiction, including but not limited to memoir, autobiography, travel writing, lyric and meditative essay, and others, with emphasis on open discussion of student work and individualized critique by instructor and peers.
ENG-249	Editing the Literary Publication	By serving as assistant readers for a literary journal, students will learn the industry practices and standards of literary publishing by reading and evaluating work submitted by writers and assisting in design and production. Note: Completion of ENG 201 recommended.
ENG-250	Advanced Creative Writing Workshop	An advanced creative writing workshop for students who have completed either Fiction Writing, Poetry Writing, Writing for Stage and Screen, or Writing Creative Nonfiction, in which students will further hone their skills and polish their work in a workshop setting. Instructor and class-wide feedback will be the primary form of response.
ENG-280	Linguistics: The Science of Words	Introduction to linguistics, the study of how language forms and changes. Includes phonetics, phonology, morphology, syntax, and semantics, along with language acquisition and development, and pragmatics.
ENG-298	Creative Writing Portfolio	As a culmination of creative writing studies, students will work one-on-one with the instructor to create a portfolio of polished manuscripts. Required materials will be determined by the instructor.
ENG-299	Topics in Creative Writing	Special topics writing class. Topics vary semester to semester.
ESL-100	SCC Success and Skills for Non-Native Speakers	Advanced instruction for non-native speaking students regarding key strategies and skills needed to be successful in an American college, including listening, speaking, note taking, test taking, time management and basic written communication. Student must take the Compass ESL test.
ESL-103	Pronunciation, Communication, and Listening for Non-Native Speakers	Instruction in pronunciation for non-native speakers. By learning the American style of intonation, rhythm/speech production and syllable stress, students will be better understood and more articulate and expressive. Small group and individual communication activities will focus on speaking and listening. Open to non-native speakers of an intermediate level or above. Student must take the Compass ESL test.
ESL-104	College Reading for Non-Native Speakers	Directed practice in college reading skills emphasizing vocabulary, comprehension, critical thinking, reading efficiency and reading across the curriculum for non-native speaking students. Student must take the Compass ESL test.&nbsp; Student may not receive credit for both RDG 104 and ESL 104.
ESL-105	Advanced Conversation and Speaking Skills for Non-Native Speakers	This course will include both verbal and nonverbal communication, both small group and public speaking, with three or four graded oral presentations. This course is designed to build speaking and listening skills for non-native speakers who have had some fluency instruction in speaking English, but need guided practice in refining conversation, making presentations and listening in a variety of situations. Other topics to be discussed include self-concept, others' perceptions, and the importance of being able to communicate in a variety of&nbsp;situations. Because this class is aimed at international students and non-native speakers, it will definitely include readings, communication, films and conversation about international and multicultural issues. Student must take the Compass ESL test.
ESL-106	Advanced College Reading for Non-Native Speakers	Directed practice in advanced college reading skills emphasizing discipline specific vocabulary, advanced comprehension, higher level critical thinking skills, improved reading efficiency and reading across the curriculum for second-language students. Student must take the Compass ESL test. Student may not receive credit for both RDG 106 and ESL 106.
ESL-107	Intensive Grammar Review for Non-Native Speakers	College-level review of grammar and vocabulary for ESL students, emphasizing target grammar concepts, sentences and paragraph structure, vocabulary, idioms and reading skills.&nbsp; Student must take Compass ESL test.
ESL-108	Intermediate Composition for Non-Native Speakers	Advanced instruction for non-native-speaking students in developing college level writing skills in English.&nbsp; Students will work on essential composition skills, including sentence, paragraph, and essay skills, as well as advanced grammar skills.&nbsp; Students will also be required to read, discuss and analyze short essays and selections as the foundation of discussion and writing.
ESL-109	Research Writing for Non-Native Speakers	Students will build skills in composition with a focus in skills necessary for writing research papers: familiarity with using the library, online databases, integrating research into essays, MLA form, while advancing reading skills, grammar, and sentence structure.&nbsp; Reading and writing assignments will be enhanced with classroom discussion, peer editing, and conferencing.&nbsp;
ESL-115	Community as Classroom Lab	This course includes writing and conversation labs that provide extra practice with difficult classroom concepts, from grammar and vocabulary to fluency and conversation, and in addition features field trips, opportunities for campus interaction, tutoring, guest speakers, independent work in the community, and practice on ESL computer learning platforms. Although some workshops/labs may be required, in this course students may choose opportunities best tailored to their needs and schedules.
ESL-120	Success in Health Care Careers for Non-Native Speakers	For non-native speakers entering health care programs in American colleges. Includes communicating in health care facilities, reading health care textbooks, medical records, and professional literature, learning in labs and clinicals, medical terminology and culture in American health care.
ESL-199	Study of U.S. Culture and Community	This course will increase students' awareness of cultural, socio-economic and life style differences between the United States and other countries, as well as provide ample opportunity for non-native speakers to practice speaking, listening, reading and writing. Students will also learn more about the various regions and cultural-ethnic groups in this country. Students will learn new vocabulary and idioms, make an oral presentation, and write a short paper by the finish of the class.
ESL-299	ESL Conversation and Current Events	Conversation development based on current events, cultural issues and academic concerns.&nbsp; Vocabulary, spoken grammar skills and listening comprehension, will be emphasized.
FRN-101	French Language and Culture I	Beginning French course that presents basic language skills of speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing, with emphasis on effective linguistic functioning in real situations. Includes culture unit on Paris. Opportunity provided for audio-lingual practice outside of class.
FRN-102	French Language and Culture II	Continuation of French 101, including culture unit on France.
FRN-190	Topics in French Language and Culture	Exploration of special topics and/or activities in 100 level French language and culture. Prerequisite and corequisite dependent on topic.
FRN-195	French Language and Civilization	Involves travel and/or study in Francophone or French culture area. May have prerequisites and may be repeated for credit. Will not satisfy General Education requirements.
FRN-201	French Language and Culture III	Follow up to French 102. Provides expanded opportunities for listening to, speaking, reading, and writing French. Continues exploration of culture, with emphasis on Francophone world. Emphasis remains on linguistic functioning in real situations.
FRN-202	French Conversation and Composition	Intensive one-semester course focusing on conversational skills, grammar review, and composition. Exploration of role of French in North America.
FRN-210	Introduction to French Cinema	Study of the history and artistic elements of French cinema through critical examination of directors, themes, and techniques. Lectures in English with films in French with English subtitles. French students must complete selected assignments in French. Credit for both FRN 210 and GLC 210 not allowed.
FRN-215	Reading in French	Reading and discussion of various short selections and at least one complete work in the original French. Reading strategies specific to French language, including vocabulary building, reading for comprehension, and use of literary tenses.
FRN-220	French Culture and Civilization	Survey of history of French civilization and influence throughout world, with emphasis on culture of present-day France and Quebec. Exercises and activities to practice and improve French language skills. (Taught in French.)
FRN-290	Topics in Intermediate French Language and Culture	Exploration of special topics in 200 level French language and culture. Prerequisite and corequisite dependant on topic.
GEO-100	Principles of Geography	Covers the major areas of geographic study, both physical and cultural, and how each is distributed globally. Promotes understanding of a multicultural world and the differing values held by people throughout that world.
GEO-101	Geography:  The Eastern World	Survey of Asia, Africa, the Middle East, Australia, and Pacific World. Emphasis on topographical, physical, human and cultural factors.
GEO-102	Geography:  The Western World	Survey of the continents of Europe, North America, and South America. Emphasis on topographical, physical, human and cultural factors.
GEO-110	Geography for Educators	Review of National Geography Standards, the DESE Common Core Standards for geographic studies, and the general education assessment review topics for the geographic area of social sciences, broken into three grade levels (fourth, eighth and 12th). &nbsp;Review which geographic concepts should be taught at which age and with what level of complexity. &nbsp;Major geographic areas will be included: maps and mapping techniques; cultural&nbsp;differences; political boundaries; global economic variations; urban design and purpose; population distribution; climate; environmental issues including the relationships between humans and the earth; natural resource distribution; topography; geomorphology; research and presentation methods.&nbsp;
GEO-115	Geography of North America	Survey of physical, topographical, economic, and cultural factors of United States and Canada.
GEO-120	Introduction to GIS	Introduction to the concepts and experiences in Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Examines how to manipulate and analyze spatial data with exploration of practical uses of GIS. Includes using GIS technology and software through hands-on exercises and projects to solve real-world problems. Focus on developing skills in the use of visual maps and written communication in GIS.
GEO-220	GIS Internship	Application of geographic technique and information learned in GIS class through work force experience.
GEO-221	GIS Internship II	Application of advanced geographic techniques and information learned in GIS class through workforce experience.
GEO-222	GIS Internship III	Application of advanced geographic techniques and information learned in GIS class through workforce experience.
GEO-225	Advanced GIS	Exploration of increasingly complex geographic concepts using computer and analytical methods to solve spatial problems. Sophisticated GIS technology used to find and explain spatial patterns. ESRI products and GPS technology used to create data and maps.
GEO-299	Topics in Geography	Exploration of topic selected by department. Introduction to research techniques and seminar approach as integral part of scholarship.
GRM-101	German Language and Culture I	Beginning German course that presents basic language skills of speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing, with emphasis on effective linguistic functioning in real situations. Opportunity provided for audio-lingual practice outside of class.
GRM-102	German Language and Culture II	Continuation of German 101.
GRM-190	Topics in German Language and Culture	Exploration of special topics and/or activities in German language and culture.
GRM-195	German Language and Civilization Experience	Involves travel and/or study in German speaking or German culture area. May have prerequisites and may be repeated for credit. Will not satisfy general education requirements.
GRM-201	German Language and Culture III	Intensive course with emphasis on conversational proficiency. Grammar review and expansion. Variety of literary and cultural readings used for vocabulary building and as basis for classroom discussion. Opportunity provided for audio-lingual practice outside of class.
GRM-202	German Conversation and Composition	Continuation and completion of materials presented in German 201.
GRM-215	Reading in German	Reading and discussion of short selections and at least one complete work in the original German. Exploration of reading strategies specific to German language, including vocabulary building, reading for comprehension, and the use of literary tenses. Summer.
GRM-290	Topics in Intermediate German Language and Culture	Exploration of special topics in 200 level German language and culture. Prerequisite and corequisite dependant on topic.
GLC-105	Family History Research Practicum	Research trip to major genealogical collection. Introduction to library research for the family historian, including research organization, trip planning, conducting actual on-site research, and post-trip follow-up and analysis. Emphasis on historical research method, patterns of social and cultural identity, and migration.
GLC-133	Cultures of Central America and the Caribbean	Explores cultures of Central America and the Caribbean Basin in the context of a study tour (or study abroad) in one or more locations in that region of the world. Investigates cultural characteristics and values and compares and contrasts the nature of diverse cultures. Explores biases and cultural influences that affect a person?s perception of these cultures.
GLC-135	Cultures of the Amazon and Andes	Explores the cultures of the upper Amazon and the Andes in the context of study tour to Peru. Investigates questions related to cultural characteristics and values with comparison and contrast of the nature of diverse cultures. Provides opportunities to understand biases and cultural influences that affect perceptions of Amazonian and Andean cultures. Specific course objectives, strategies, and evaluation procedures outlined in a learning agreement with the instructor. Summer.
GLC-140	Celtic History and Contemporary Culture	Field course with focus on Celtic political and cultural history from prehistoric to modern times. Experiential approach that combines study tours of various Celtic sites with readings, films, writing assignments, and/or other activities. Specific course objectives, strategies, and evaluation procedures defined in individual learning agreement with the instructor.
GLC-145	The Theater in London	Immersion trip into the theater in London, England, through play performances, museum visits, backstage tours, and lectures and discussions led by experts in theatrical arts and crafts to introduce the best English-speaking theater in the world.
GLC-155	Central European History and Cultures	Field course with focus on European political and cultural history. Exploration of history and cultures in context of study tour to Central Europe . Among cultural issues deals with question of what is ?Europe.? Specific course objectives, strategies, and evaluation procedures outlined in a learning agreement with the instructor.
GLC-170	African Culture	Field course with a focus on contemporary culture in a specific region of the African continent. Experiential approach that combines study tours of various African sites with readings, films, writing assignments, and other activities. Specific course objectives, strategies, and evaluation procedures outlined in learning agreement with the instructor.
GLC-180	Australian Culture	Field course with a focus on contemporary culture in a specific region of the Australian continents. Experiential approach combining study tours of various Australian sites with readings, films, writing assignments, and other activities. Specific course objectives, strategies, and evaluation procedures defined in individual learning agreement with the instructor.
GLC-210	Introduction to French Cinema	Study of the history and artistic elements of French cinema through critical examination of directors, themes, and techniques. Lectures in English with films in French with English subtitles. French students must complete selected assignments in French. Credit for both GLC 210 and FRN 210 not allowed.
GLC-215	Intercultural Communication	Explores issues related to intercultural communication process. Considers important role of context (social, cultural, and historical) in intercultural interactions. Topics include stereotyping, prejudice, ethnocentrism, social class and religious identities, folk culture, power, and intercultural conflict.
GLC-290	Special Topics in Global Culture	Exploration of a humanities-based global topic selected by department.&nbsp; Global events, current or historical information, and geographical knowledge will be included.
GLS-101	Introduction to Global Studies	Introductory course to develop global awareness and exposure to different cultures. Provides interdisciplinary approach to international and intercultural issues.
GLS-290	Special Topics in Global Studies	Exploration of a non-humanities-based global topic selected by department. Global events, current or historical information, and geographical knowledge will be included.
HIM-110	Medical Terminology	Introduction to medical terminology focusing on building anatomical and pathophysiologic terms through identification and interpretation of Latin and Greek roots, prefixes, and suffixes. Pronunciation, spelling, and transcribing basic terms relating to body systems, medical specialties, and common diseases.
HIM-115	Pharmacology and Diagnostic Procedures	The language of medical specialties, diagnostic modalities, and body systems. Emphasis on word analysis, pronunciation, spelling and commonly prescribed drugs.
HIM-120	Health Care Data	Introduction to health information management including health care delivery systems; health information management profession; health care data, collection, quality, access and retention.
HIM-121	Health Care Data Laboratory	Case studies, projects and hands on activities to reinforce concepts from HIM 120.
HIM-125	Health Care Technologies	Continuation of HIM (HIT) 120 with emphasis on indexes and registries, computer-based patient record, and health information systems.
HIM-126	Heath Care Technology Laboratory	Special projects, guest speakers, and field trips to reinforce principles taught in Health Care Technologies lecture.
HIM-128	Electronic Health Records	In-depth study of Electronic Health Record system development life cycle.
HIM-129	Data Presentation	This course is a continuation of Healthcare Data Analysis, focusing on data presentation.
HIM-140	Anatomy & Physiology for Allied Health	Foundation for the normal structure and function of human anatomy systems, focusing on the relationships between systems for students in Health Information Management and allied health programs. Fundamentals include anatomical and physiological terminology and homeostatic mechanisms. Note: This course does not meet the requirements for biology, nursing or OTA majors.
HIM-141	Pathophysiology for Allied Health	Study of pathology and general health management of diseases, conditions and injuries by body systems across the life span. Included: etiology, symptoms, signs, diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and outcomes of diseases, conditions and injuries. Course is not transferable. Students planning on continuing to a four-year university should take BIO 265.
HIM-150	Directed Practicum	Introduction to medical records department in variety of hospitals and alternative settings.&nbsp;
HIM-220	ICD Coding	Study of classification systems with major emphasis on inpatient coding using ICD-10-CM, ICD 10 PCS and reimbursement methodologies, specifically DRGs.
HIM-221	ICD Coding	Special projects to reinforce principles taught in ICD Coding&nbsp;lecture.
HIM-230	Healthcare Data Analysis	Techniques to extract, analyze, and interpret healthcare data from the electronic health record and public data sources using database querying and data mining techniques.Methods covered will include Access relational databases, Excel spreadsheets, pivot tables, and SQL queries.
HIM-238	Healthcare Legal & Ethical Issues	Study legal and ethical issues in the health care field focusing on procedures involved in court disclosure of medical records, laws pertaining to release of information from medical records, and medical record requirements for accrediting, approving, licensing and certifying agencies.&nbsp; Learn laws and regulations governing preparation and use of medical records, ethical practice standards, fraud and abuse, and other medical/legal issues.
HIM-241	Health Care Statistics	In-depth study of hospital statistics, sources, definitions, collection and reporting of data.&nbsp;
HIM-242	Health Care Management	Principles of organization and strategic planning including workforce decisions, finance and budgeting, leadership techniques and team building to identify and manage process improvement.
HIM-243	Quality Management and Performance Improvement	A basic overview of quality performance improvement processes, function, applications, and utilization review.
HIM-250	Applied Practicum	Advanced student practice emphasizing targeted skill sets and building skills applied in a specific health care setting. Program capstone experiences included.
HIM-251	Medical Billing/Coding Clinical	
HIM-252	Certified Coding Associate	Review of the coding competencies and skills in preparation of a coding certification exam.
HIM-260	Health Information Management Seminar	Principles of supervisory management applied to a Health Information Management environment, including: team work and leadership, staffing, training, performance and productivity monitoring, work process design, policies and procedures, and budgeting.
HIM-270	CPT Coding	Outpatient coding guidelines and reimbursement with major emphasis on CPT coding.
HIM-271	CPT Coding Laboratory	Application of outpatient coding guidelines and reimbursement with major emphasis on CPT coding, to reinforce principles taught in lecture component, HIM(HIT) 270.
HIM-280	Healthcare Billing and Reimbursement Issues	Healthcare billing and reimbursement issues will be covered. Included: payor categories, APCs and other prospective payment systems, the revenue cycle, chargemaster, RBRVS, regulatory guidelines, billing processes, etc.
HIM-290	Advanced Coding	This course is a continuation of HIM(HIT) 220/221, focusing on assigning diagnosis and procedural codes from actual patient scenarios and determining the validity of CAC assigned codes.
HIM-291	Advanced Coding Laboratory	Application of coding guidelines with major emphasis on actual case scenarios, to reinforce principles and cases from HIM 290.
HIS-101	U.S. History to 1877	Survey of historical, cultural, political, economic, and institutional forces and events that shaped United States history through period of Reconstruction. HIS 101 complies with provisions of Section 170.011 RsMo.
HIS-102	U.S. History Since 1877	Survey of the historical, cultural, political, economic, and institutional forces and events that shaped United States history from 1877 to present. HIS 102 complies with provisions of Section 170.011 RsMo.
HIS-105	Family History Research Practicum	Research trip to major genealogical collection. Introduction to library research for the family historian, including research organization, trip planning, conducting actual on-site research, and post-trip follow-up and analysis. Emphasis on historical research method, patterns of social and cultural identity, and migration.
HIS-115	U.S. History Since 1945	Survey of United States from end of WWII to present. Special attention placed on historical, political, social, and cultural forces that have influenced the nation. Covers constitutional and judicial changes since 1945. HIS 115 complies with provisions of Section 170.011 RsMo.
HIS-145	Western Civilization:  Ancient and Medieval Heritage	Introduction to ancient civilizations of Eastern Mediterranean, classical civilizations of Greece, Rome, and Western European society up to the Renaissance.
HIS-146	Western Civilizations, Modern European Heritage	Beginning with Renaissance, survey of history of Western civilization through post-WWII period.
HIS-160	Native American History	Introduction and survey of Native American History from prehistoric to the present. Attention placed on tribal histories and their social and political relationships with various European powers and the United States.
HIS-202	Southwestern Asia: The Islamic World & India	Survey of social, cultural and political history of the Middle East and India.
HIS-203	Eastern Asia: China and the Pacific Rim	Survey of social, cultural and political history of East Asia and South Asia.
HIS-230	Film as History	Selected historical topics discussed against how film has presented them for general audiences. View at least six feature films representing historical issues and through required readings, presentations, and discussions, evaluate and critique the fact or fiction.
HIS-240	Europe Since 1914	Beginning with events leading up to WWI, survey of political, economic, and social history of Europe. Special attention given to Russian Revolution, Soviet State, Nazi Germany and collapse of the Soviet Empire in the 1990s.
HIS-270	History of Missouri	Emphasis on events in Missouri as a way to understand the development of America. Covers national trends and problems such as immigration, westward expansion, industrialization, and racial issues from the perspective of impact on Missouri. Examination of prominent Missourians is included. This course complies with provisions of Section 170.011 RsMo.
HIS-280	Modern British History	Introduction to political/social life in modern Britain: social stratification, the historic evolution of the political infrastructure, and dealing with published materials on the historical context of British social and political issues.
HIS-296	History Internship	Students placed in participatory position in a government agency, museum/archives, or community organization. Requires research paper relating to some aspect of the internship.
HIS-299	Topics in History	Exploration of topic selected by the department. Introduction to historical research techniques and seminar approach as integral part of scholarship.
HON-100	Inquiries in Composition and History	Interdisciplinary Honors course dealing with topics in English and History. Students will explore connections between the disciplines of English and History, while meeting the requirements and objectives of an English 102 or History 102. Topics will vary.&nbsp;Admissions to the Honors program required.&nbsp;
HON-101	Inquiries in English and History	Interdisciplinary Honors course dealing with topics in English and History. Students will explore connections between the disciplines of English and History, while meeting the requirements and objectives of an English 102 or History 299 course. Topics will vary.&nbsp;Admissions to the Honors program required.&nbsp;
HON-102	Inquires in Psychology & Political Science	An introductory overview of the intersection of psychology and political science. it is an examination of behavioral, cognitive, psychoanalytic, humanistic and biological viewpoints in psychology. The course includes learning principles and applications, motivation, emotions, stress, psychobiology, personality, abnormal behavior and approaches to therapy as well as the workings of the federal, state, and local governments in the United States. This course will also give students a broad overview of the issues that underlie our political system, as well as how citizens and government interact with one another.&nbsp;Admissions to the Honors program required.&nbsp;
HON-103	Inquiries in Political Science and Communications	Interdisciplinary Honors course dealing with topics in political science and communications. Explore connections between the disciplines of political science and communications. Topics will vary. Student can count this as credit for COM 102 or POL 299.&nbsp;Admissions to the Honors program required.&nbsp;
HON-104	Inquiries in Literature and Anthropology	Interdisciplinary Honors course dealing with topics in literature and anthropology. Students will explore connections between the disciplines of literature and anthropology. Topics will vary. Students can use the course to meet the requirement of LIT&nbsp;200 or ANT&nbsp;161.&nbsp;Admissions to the Honors program required.&nbsp;
HON-105	Inquiries in Philosophy and Math	Interdisciplinary honors course dealing with topics in philosophy and math.&nbsp;Exploration of&nbsp;the connections between the disciplines of philosophy and math. Topics will vary.&nbsp;Admissions to the Honors program required.&nbsp;
HON-106	Biology and Psychopharmacology	Overview of the intersection of biology and psychopharmacology. Emphasis will be on issues related to the use of specific psychoactive drugs in human culture. Students will become more informed about the bio-psychological factors that underlie drug use and abuse. Course will include a survey of human body structure and function for the non-science major while meeting the requirements of BIO 110 (Human Biology) for students pursuing an Associates of Arts degree.
HON-107	Inquiries in Composition and Sociology	Explore connections between the disciplines of composition and sociology while meeting the requirements and objectives of an English 102 or Sociology 101 course. Topics will vary. Admissions to the Honors Program required.
HON-108	Inquiries in Literature and Philosophy	Interdisciplinary Honors course dealing with topics in literature and philosophy. Students will explore connections between the disciplines of literature and philosophy. Topics will vary.
HMS-100	Introduction to Human Services	Survey introduction to human and community needs and to concepts of helping profession. Examination of community resources, relationship of agencies and bureaucracies to total community, and worker's role and responsibility in helping profession.
HMS-101	Human Services:  Theories and Skills	Overview of methodology used in helping profession. Includes analysis of helping relationships, study of interpersonal skills and practice techniques. Emphasizes process-oriented approach to solving individual, family, and community problems. <i>Spring</i>
HMS-102	Human Services:  Policy and Politics	Analysis of political process involved in formulation of social welfare policies from a historical point of view. Federal, state, and local programs examined in terms of skills and knowledge to effect program planning and delivery.
HMS-103	Addictive Disease Concepts	Explores addiction from historical and theoretical background to current concepts. Variety of addictive behaviors examined with special focus on psychoactive drug dependency.
HMS-104	Treatment:  Alcohol and Drug Abuse	Emphasizes concept of treatment of alcohol and drug abuse as a continuum of processes from intervention through rehabilitation. Incorporation of integral parts of continuum and ways in which it addresses needs of people suffering from alcohol and drug abuse.
HMS-106	Introduction to Youth Services Management	Addresses needs and issues of potentially and presently employed residential treatment workers, including philosophy of residential services, observation and recording skills, problem-solving, group skills, and team approach.
HMS-151	Gerontology	Overview of normal effects of aging including physical, psychological, and social changes. Problems associated with aging, such as increased dependence, loss of health, financial constraints, loss of friends and spouse, and altered living arrangements. Content presented from perspective of aging person and society as a whole.
HMS-195	Human Services: Professional Field Skills	Builds on theories presented in core HMS classes. Professional skill sets, such as case management, and informational/motivational/interviewings will be emphasized, allowing students to refine these skills prior to enrolling in practicum courses. Students will participate in evaluative efforts to measure preparedness to work as human services.
HMS-201	Human Services Practicum I	Field work experience in social, educational, law enforcement (corrections), or other community service organization. Supervision by practicum site professional and college faculty member. Ten or more hours of work experience each week.
HMS-202	Human Services Practicum II	Continuation of HMS 201. Depending on student objectives, Human Services Practicum II may be in the same organization or different one. Ten or more hours of work experience each week.
HMS-203	Human Services Practicum Seminar I	Discussion and analysis in small groups of the human services practicum experience. Special learning objectives related to kind of work student will do in organization after completion of program.
HMS-204	Human Services Practicum Seminar II	Continuation of HMS 203 with different learning objectives. Related to work student will do after completion of programs.
HMS-205	Disability and Society	Overview of disabilities: cognitive, psychiatric and physical.&nbsp; History of disability, major legislation that impacts persons with disabilities, resources in the community and how disability impacts the person and society.
HMS-290	Special Topics in Human Services	Individual study or selected classes focused on specific Human Services topics which will vary each semester and by instructor.&nbsp; Students may suggest topics of interest.
HMS-298	Human Services Capstone	Culminating experience integrating Human Services Associate of Applied Science program course work.&nbsp; Required for Human Services AAS degree-seeking students in the final semester before graduation.
INE-101	Intensive English: Reading and Writing	Instruction for non-native-speaking students in developing emerging reading and writing skills in English. Students will work on essential writing skills at sentence level composition, and they will study vocabulary and idioms. Students will also be required to read, discuss and analyze short selections. Culture sharing and acclimation to the environment in the United States will also make up some of the reading and writing assignments.
INE-102	Intensive English: Listening and Speaking for NNS	Instruction for non-native-speaking students to develop emerging English listening and speaking skills in both academic and life-skills based situations. Activities will build students' confidence in speaking English. Students will practice pronunciation and listen to English at word level, sentence level and in simple conversations. Vocabulary, terminology, idioms, slang, grammar and syntax will be taught implicitly and explicitly. Students will discuss, interpret and analyze short readings or videos. Both culture sharing and everyday conversational strategies and topics will be included.
INE-199	Phonics and Fluency	Focus will be on improving pronunciation and fluency, especially when reading aloud. Activities include spelling and phonics instruction as well as speaking and reading exercises designed to increase reader's fluency and natural voice when reading. A grade of "C" or better is needed to move into the next ESL class, ESL 104. Emphasis will be on speaking although writing will be part of the class curriculum as well.
JRN-120	Introduction to Journalism	Survey of journalism, including history and study of various media. Emphasis is on journalistic principles, writing, editing and makeup, including work on official student publications.
JRN-240	Writing for the Print Media	Introductory course in developing skills in writing and reporting for print media. Special attention given to news releases, feature stories, and reporting techniques. Introduction to use of photography.
LIT-200	World Mythology	Survey of central myths of Greece, Middle East, Africa, India, Native America, and China. Emphasis on how myths have shaped various cultures.
LIT-201	Mythology in Western Culture	This class focuses on the pervading influence of Western mythological traditions in literature and culture.
LIT-207	Introduction to the Bible as Literature-The Old Testament:  Genesis through Malachi	A review of Biblical significance and influence in secular literature. Biblical literacy is assumed by such authors as Chaucer, Keats, Shakespeare, Asimov, Kemp, and Atwood. Cultural touchstones of morality, humanity, and sexuality grounded in Biblical texts will be examined in literature.
LIT-210	American Literature From 1620-1865	Study of development of U.S. literary tradition beginning with early colonists through Civil War. Reading and discussion of major authors of poetry, fiction, drama and historical documents.
LIT-215	Introduction to Poetry	A close study of poetry with special emphasis on the varieties of poetic form and the means of interpretation and evaluation. The works studied will be international in nature and from at least three different centuries.
LIT-216	Dramatic Literature	Introductory course in dramatic literature stressing the influences of the past upon modern theater, the commonality and differences between theatrical and filmed drama, and the process on how the written script becomes a live or filmed production.
LIT-218	Literature about Place	With increasing mobility and blending of cultures, ideas about place and setting are even more crucial to identity than in the past.
LIT-220	American Literature From 1865-present	Survey of American literature beginning with the period after the Civil War to the present. Major American writers in poetry, fiction, and drama will be read and discussed in relation to the development of intellectual thought and literary theory. Includes writers who reflect diverse voices ? Native American, African American, Asian American, Latin American, etc. ? who make America unique.
LIT-221	The American Dream and the 20th Century	A multi-discipline course focusing on the concept of the American Dream in history, literature and film.&nbsp; This course emphasizes the American Era from the end of WWI to the present.
LIT-222	Native American Literature	A multi-disciplined study of the contribution of non-Europeans upon the national culture.
LIT-223	African American Literature	Survey of African-American literature from colonial America to present day United States. Includes slave narratives, essays speeches, music, poetry, short fiction, novels and drama/film, as well as a focus on their historical contexts.
LIT-230	Contemporary Fiction	Introduction to American and international fiction written from 1960 to the present. Includes short and long fiction with major emphasis on the similarities and differences of the cultural narratives that reflect the global village.
LIT-236	Science Fiction	Focus on interplay between society and scientific theories, advances and fears of change.&nbsp; Beginning in the romantic period, examines societal reactions to challenges presented by scientific discovery and the resulting changes in world view.&nbsp; Course uses fiction and film.
LIT-237	Detective Fiction	Among the most popular type of genre fiction, beginning with E.A. Poe.&nbsp; Reflecting values and fears of the society and provides entertainment and insight into cultures past and present.&nbsp; Classic writers of detective fiction, contemporary practitioners and film examples are used.
LIT-238	Horror Fiction	Examination of classic and contemporary writing in order to explore the human fascination with the monstrous, the supernatural, and states of psychological consciousness.&nbsp; Includes the evolution of the horror genre and examine its place in the literary cannon.
LIT-239	Humor in Literature	Explores humor in various media, including written sketches, short stories, novels, film by various writers, and the evolution of the humor genre, as well as the value it holds both historically and presently.
LIT-240	Contemporary Literature	Survey of post-modern literature from 1946 to the present. Includes reading and discussion of poems, essays, short stories, plays, and novels representative of the global and multicultural nature of contemporary society.
LIT-241	Sociology Through Literature	Application of sociological concepts to literature to analyze socio-historical events.
LIT-242	Post Colonial Literature	From Australia to Asia, from the Middle East to Africa, writers in the former colonies of the British empire found a unique voice to explore their lives and their countries.&nbsp; Focuses on the voices of post-colonial literature in the 20th century as they deal with issues of power, gender and politics.
LIT-250	English Literature Before 1800	Overview of earliest works written in English. Traces development of various forms of literature from beginnings in early Anglo-Saxon poetry through Shakespeare?s plays and Romantic Poets.
LIT-252	Introduction to Shakespeare	Introductory course of Shakespeare's insights into human behavior, the conflict inherent within societies, and his use of language.
LIT-260	English Literature After 1800	Overview of English literature beginning with Romantics and continuing through Modern Age. Includes poetry, drama, fiction, and essays.
LIT-262	Gothic Literature	Focuses on a broad reading of novels, films, stories, and poems in the Gothic literary sensibility.&nbsp; Unlike horror fiction, which focuses on grisly detail, Gothic is primarily concerned with fear of the unknown and resulting paranoia.
LIT-265	Fiction to Film	Investigates fiction and film with emphasis on their uniqueness and relationship, their common narrative elements that convince reader and viewer of their correspondence to life, and of the process of translation from one narrative form to another.
LIT-267	Film as Literature	This course seeks to read film from a literary perspective; discussions and readings are rooted in literary concepts such as character, theme, narrative structure, genre, motif, symbol, literary theory and adaptation. Sections of the course may generally survey this topic or be focused on a particular topic such as a single director, genre, or discourse.
LIT-271	Literature and Contemporary Cultures	Introduction to prose, poetry, drama, and film from around the globe by authors from 1900 to Present.
LIT-272	World Literature - Ancient World Through the Renaissance	Survey course in the foundations of world literary traditions from pre-Classical and Classical World through Middle Ages and Renaissance.
LIT-273	World Literature - Enlightenment to 20th Century	Survey course in the foundations of world literary traditions from the European Enlightenment through the 20th century.
LIT-274	Evolution of the Tragedy:  Tragic Heroes and Heroines	Overview of the evolution of dramatic tragedy from Greek to Modern theater.
LIT-275	Holocaust Literature	Study of novels, essays, poetry, and other art centered on genocide in the Second World War and the post-Holocaust world. Explores matters of Jewish particularity as well as global implications of the Holocaust.
LIT-280	Gender Issues in Literature	Through the reading of fiction and non-fiction texts, this class introduces students to literary, cultural, political and historical issues that shape gender and identity.
LIT-289	Writing about Literature	This course focuses on different ways of reading literature, using various theoretical lenses. Read the words of literary theorists and then apply their analysis along to novels, poems, short stories, drama, and films.
LIT-299	Topics in Literature	Variety of special literature studies offered.
LGM-101	Logistics and Supply Chain I	Foundational knowledge needed to understand the world of supply chain logistics and related core competencies including: safety, quality control, communications, teamwork, good workplace conduct, and familiarity with computer systems that support supply chain operations.
LGM-210	Logistics and Supply Chain II	Emphasis on mid-level technical knowledge needed to understand the world of supply chain logistics and related core competencies. Includes product receiving, product storage, order processing, packaging, shipment, inventory control, safe handling of hazardous materials, evaluation of transportation modes, custom, and dispatch and tracking operations. Certified Logistics Associate (LGM 101) (MSSC) is a prerequisite to taking this course. Prepares students for MSSC/CLT. Includes a required certified exam upon class completion.
MFG-101	Principles of Safety	Introduction to the manufacturing world including specific instruction to facilitate safe work practices in industrial environment.
MFG-105	MFG 105	This course will assist students in securing employment. Students will develop an awareness of personal and academic skills as related to the job-seeking process.
MFG-111	Principles of Quality Practices	Provides knowledge and skills related to effective quality processes and practices used in today's manufacturing industry.
MFG-141	Principles of Green Production	Introduction to the sustainability principles of "green" production, defined as workplace activities across all industries within the manufacturing sector that require the use of equipment, technologies, and processes to improve the environmental performance of manufacturing companies.
MFG-201	Principles of Manufacturing Processes and Production	A broad overview of manufacturing sub-industries and their related products, processes, challenges and best practices.
MFG-205	Manufacturing Process Controls	Provides students with current practices associated with production planning, production scheduling, and controlling production.
MFG-215	Problem Solving Tactics in Manufacturing	Training in problem solving is emphasized as well as how to establish a culture of continuous improvement in a proactive environment.
MFG-220	Principles of Maintenance Awareness	Insights into the basics of good maintenance practices for manufacturing through an understanding of electrical, mechanical and fluid power systems.
MFG-225	Supervisor Skills	Foundational training for leaders at all levels including how to solve problems, set goals, and manage the conflict within an organization using<br />hands on,interactive concepts.
MFG-230	Manufacturing Measurement	Emphasis on use of instrumentation and process control. Concepts and measurement of physical variables and brief descriptions of individual process and combination of processes used in industry, such as go/no go, plug gauges, flatness, and coordinate measuring machine (CMM), control plans, and fixtures will be covered. Theory of operation and application of associated process instruments included.
MAT-058	Supplement to College Algebra-General Education	Provides a supplement, which will reinforce prerequisite concepts and skills necessary for success in Math 158.
MAT-096	Pre-Algebra	&nbsp;Topics include percents, conversions, area and volume, signed numbers, algebraic expressions, linear equations, statistical graphs, mean, median, mode and their applications. Pass/fail course; does not count toward graduation.
MAT-098	Beginning Algebra	Topics include linear equations and inequalities, quadratic equations, operations on polynomials, exponent properties, factoring, Pythagorean Theorem, operations on rational expressions, graphs of points and linear equations, systems of two equations in two variables, square roots and applications.
MAT-105	Applied Math	For career students to develop quantitative reasoning skills. Includes basic logic, financial decision-making, probability, statistical reasoning, linear and exponential modeling, and right triangle applications. Relevance of mathematics discussed as it relates to other disciplines.
MAT-108	Understanding K-8 Mathematics	Basic concepts of the K-8 math curriculum. Concepts experienced through multiple representations ? numerically, algebraically, geometrically, and verbally.
MAT-121	Intermediate Algebra	Topics include linear, quadratic, absolute value, rational, exponential, and radical forms and related expressions, equations, inequalities, and applications; relationship between graph and equation of first/second degree and exponential functions; systems of equations in two or three variables; and equations and graphs of circles.
MAT-122	Euclidean Geometry	Study of geometrical properties and formal Euclidean proofs developed from definitions, postulates, theorems, and corollaries. Topics include intersecting and parallel lines, triangles, quadrilaterals, circles, area and volume, and coordinate geometry.
MAT-150	Trigonometry	Grade of C or better in MAT 160 College Algebra strongly recommended. Study of trigonometric functions and applications. Topics include angles, length of arc, trigonometric functions, law of cosines, law of sines, identities, trigonometric equations, inverse trigonometric functions, complex numbers, and polar coordinates. Students may not receive credit for both MAT 150 and MAT 171.
MAT-152	Algebra Bridges to Calculus & Analytic Geometry I	Course bridges the gap between MAT 158 and MAT 162. It is for students who have taken MAT 158 as a general education course and are now STEM majors seeking a path into MAT 180. A grade of C or better in both MAT 152 and MAT 158 will satisfy the algebra prerequisite for MAT 180. MAT 180 has a trigonometry prerequisite that may be satisfied by a grade of C or better in MAT 150 or equivalent transfer course.
MAT-155	Contemporary College Math	This course satisfies the general education requirement for the AA degree. Topics include: inductive and deductive reasoning, set theory, Venn diagrams, truth tables and logic, Geometry and Trigonometry, sequences and series, mathematics of finance, probability, statistics, and applications.
MAT-156	College Algebra-Educators	This course satisfies the general education requirement for the AAT degree for Education majors. &nbsp;Topics include linear and quadratic equations and inequalities, systems of linear equations, polynomials, functions and their graphs, sequences and series, perimeter, circumference, area, surface area, volume, similarity, congruence, Pythagorean Theorem, Trigonometric ratios, analyzing geometric proofs, coordinate geometry, statistical graphs, counting and probability techniques, sampling, inference, and descriptive statistics including measures of central tendency and spread, and applications.
MAT-157	College Statistics- General Education	Topics include constructing and interpreting graphs, descriptive statistics, sampling techniques, counting techniques, probability, probability distributions, confidence interval estimates, hypothesis testing, correlation, regression, and ANOVA. Students may not receive credit for both Math 157 and Math 175. This course is recommended for non-STEM majors.
MAT-158	College Algebra- General Education	This course satisfies the general education requirement for the AA degree. Designed for Non-STEM (non-Science, non-Technology, non-Engineering, non-Mathematics) majors. Topics include linear and quadratic equations and inequalities; complex numbers and solution of higher degree polynomial equations; systems of linear equations; matrices; graphing functions including exponential, logarithmic, rational and polynomial functions, sequences, and series. Students may not receive credit for both MAT 158 and MAT 160 or MAT 162 or MAT 171.
MAT-162	College Algebra- STEM	This course satisfies the general education requirement for the AA degree. Designed for students in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) transfer programs. Topics include linear and quadratic equations and inequalities; complex numbers and solution of higher degree polynomial equations; systems of linear equations; matrices; graphing functions including exponential, logarithmic, and rational polynomial functions; conic sections; sequences, series, and binomial theorem. Students may not receive credit for both MAT 162 and MAT 158 or MAT 160 or MAT 171.
MAT-171	Pre-Calculus Mathematics	Unified study of College Algebra and Trigonometry provides necessary background for Calculus. Includes linear, quadratic, rational, and higher degree polynomial equations and inequalities; systems of equations; relations and functions along with graphs and equations; exponentials and logarithms; inverse; degree and radian measure; trigonometric functions; identities; triangles; vectors; polar coordinates; complex numbers; matrices and determinants; sequences and series; binomial theorem; mathematical induction; and applications. Students may not receive credit for MAT 171 and either MAT 150 and MAT 160. Students not planning to take Calculus may satisfy mathematics requirement for A.A. degree with MAT 160 or MAT 165 in lieu of MAT 171.
MAT-175	Introductory Statistics	Topics include descriptive statistics, sampling techniques, counting techniques, probability, probability distributions, confidence interval estimates, hypothesis testing, simple linear regression, and one-way ANOVA.
MAT-180	Calculus and Analytic Geometry I	First in a sequence of three courses including analytic geometry, differential calculus, and integral calculus. Recommended for majors in mathematics, computer science, physical sciences, or engineering. Includes analytic geometry, functions, limits, continuity, the derivative and differentials, applications of the derivative and differentials, antidifferentiation, indefinite and definite integrals, and applications of definite integral.
MAT-201	Structure of Math Systems I	For potential elementary teachers. Topics include sets, logic, number bases, systems of numeration, system of whole numbers, systems of integers, system of rational numbers, development of real number system, field properties, algorithms for whole numbers, and terminology of mathematics.
MAT-202	Structure of Math Systems II	Intuitive study of elementary geometry, including constructions, congruence, similarity, motion geometry tessellation, and deductive theory of geometry. Study of measurement, including area and volumes. Introduction to concepts of probability and statistics.
MAT-210	Survey Calculus	Recommended for business, life sciences, and social science majors. Focus on techniques of differential and integral calculus with application to business, life sciences, and social sciences. Trigonometry not used.
MAT-230	Calculus and Analytic Geometry II	Second course in sequence of three recommended for majors in mathematics, computer science, physical sciences, or engineering. Topics include transcendental functions, techniques of integration, indeterminate forms, improper integrals, infinite series, and polar curves.
MAT-240	Calculus and Analytic Geometry III	Third course in sequence of three recommended for mathematics, computer science, physical science, or engineering majors.&nbsp; Topics include calculus of vectors in two or three dimensions, partial derivatives, multiple integrals and their applications; and introductory topics from differential equations.
MAT-242	Introductory Linear Algebra	A first course in linear algebra intended for mathematics, computer science, science, and engineering majors. Topics include matrix algebra, determinants, and vector spaces, linear transformations, and eigenvalues and eigenvectors.
MAT-250	Differential Equations	First course in differential equations for mathematics, science, and engineering majors. Topics include solution and application of ordinary differential equations including n-th order nonhomogeneous equations with variable coefficients and simultaneous differential equations. Methods used include Laplace transform, power series, variation of parameter, matrix methods and introduction to numerical solutions.
MAT-260	A Transition to Theoretical Mathematics	First course in theoretical mathematics for mathematics, computer science, engineering and science majors. Includes logic and proofs, set theory, relations and functions, cardinality, introductory abstract algebra and introductory real analysis.
MDA-115	Pharmacology & Administration of Medications	Instruction in concepts and application of pharmacological principles. Focuses on drug classifications, principles and procedures of medication administration, mathematical systems and conversions, calculation of drug problems, and medico-legal responsibilities of the medical assistant.
MDA-120	Administrative Procedures	Focus is on medical office procedures including appointment scheduling, medical records creation and maintenance, interpersonal communications, coding, billing, collecting, third party reimbursement, credit arrangements and computer use in the medical office.
MDA-121	Medical Insurance	Emphasis is on medical office coding procedures for payment and reimbursement by patient or third-party payers for ambulatory care settings.
MDA-140	Procedures in a Clinical Setting	
MDA-150	Medical Assisting Clinical/Externship	Health-related work-based learning experience enables students to apply specialized occupational theory, skills and concepts. Direct supervision is provided by the clinical professional (faculty or preceptor) generally in a clinical setting. Clinical education is unpaid learning experience.
MUS-021	Recital and Concert Attendance	Attendance and/or participation at musical performances and master classes, repeated until degree requirement is satisfactorily met.
MUS-101	Foundations of Music	Study in clefs, notation, rhythm, scale structures, pitch, and melodic writing. Basic introduction with no previous experience necessary.
MUS-102	Accompanying	Practical experience and working knowledge of basic and advanced techniques for successful piano accompanying.
MUS-105	SCC Singers I	Performance class; students will work on music culminating in public performances. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-106	SCC Singers II	Second enrollment of MUS 105.
MUS-107	SCC Singers III	Third enrollment of MUS 105
MUS-108	SCC Singers IV	Fourth enrollment of MUS 105.
MUS-109	American Popular Music	Survey of American popular music from 1840 to the present. Examination of the types, styles, and influential musicians of American pop music.
MUS-110	American Music Appreciation	Emphasis on American music as a panorama of distinct yet parallel streams-popular, folk, sacred, and classical-that reflect the uniquely diverse character of the United States. Musical styles will be compared and contrasted across regions and time, delivering a vision of American music both exuberant and inventive, a music that arises out of the history and musical traditions of many immigrants.
MUS-111	Music Appreciation	Introductory course for non-music majors. Presents main elements of music, how they develop and change throughout history, and the role of music in society. Emphasis on understanding musical elements and aural applications. Attendance required at live performances.
MUS-112	Jazz Appreciation	Explores the earliest origins of jazz from Creole roots in Louisiana through blues, ragtime, Dixieland, big band, swing, be-bop, cool jazz, avante garde, Latin jazz, and fusion. Students taking this course may not receive credit for MUS 234.
MUS-113	Musical Theater Appreciation I	Study of musical theater from its beginnings through Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein. Students taking this course may not receive credit for MUS 229/ THE 229.
MUS-114	Musical Theater Appreciation II	Study of musical theater from Rodgers and Hammerstein to the present. Students taking this course may not receive credit for MUS 230/THE 230.
MUS-115	Chamber Choir	Select choral ensemble specializing in chamber, madrigal, and show choir literature, culminating in public performance. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-116	Chamber Choir II	Select choral ensemble specializing in chamber, madrigal, and show choir literature, culminating in public performance. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-117	Chamber Choir III	Select choral ensemble specializing in chamber, madrigal, and show choir literature, culminating in public performance. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-118	Chamber Choir IV	Fourth semester of Chamber Choir.
MUS-119	Piano Proficiency I	Entry-level piano course for music majors with little knowledge of basic rudiments and grand staff reading.  The first of a four-course sequence needed to prepare music education majors to meet Missouri piano proficiency requirements for certification to teach in public schools.
MUS-120	Piano Proficiency II	Continuation of MUS 119.
MUS-121	Piano Class I	Develops basic skills and techniques in piano playing, applicable to various types of music. No previous keyboard experience required.
MUS-122	Piano Class II	Continuation of MUS 121.
MUS-123	Voice Class I	Fundamentals of tone production, diction, posture, and breathing. Includes simple songs and part singing.
MUS-124	Voice Class II	Continuation of MUS 123.
MUS-125	Guitar Class I	Basic guitar skills through a classic method, including first-position notes and scales, root chords, and accompaniment patterns while developing solo and ensemble skills. Corequisite: MUS 101 or basic theory knowledge. Recommended materials: Classic Guitar.
MUS-126	Guitar Class II	Second enrollment of MUS 125.
MUS-127	Guitar Class III	Third enrollment of MUS 125 and 126.
MUS-128	Guitar Class IV	Fourth enrollment of MUS 125, 126, and 127.
MUS-129	Percussion Class I	Open to students with little or no previous formal training. Note-reading and basic percussion playing techniques for snare drum, timpani, xylophone/marimba, orchestral percussion instruments, drum set, and Latin percussion instruments (bongos, congas, timbales, etc.) will be included. Selected works for each instrument will be studied.
MUS-130	Percussion Class II	Open to students with little or no previous formal training. Note-reading and basic percussion playing techniques for snare drum, timpani, xylophone/marimba, orchestral percussion instruments, drum set, and Latin percussion instruments (bongos, congas, timbales, etc.) will be included. Selected works for each instrument will be studied.
MUS-131	Music Theory I	Study of basic rhythm, melody, principal triads and inversions, dominant seventh chords, cadences, non-harmonic tones, part-writing, and keyboard harmony.
MUS-132	Music Theory II	continuation of MUS 131 including secondary triads, seventh chords, secondary dominants, elementary modulation, figured bass, and keyboard harmony.
MUS-133	Ear Training and Sightsinging I	Study of rhythmic, melodic, and harmonic dictation in major and minor scales and sightsinging in treble and bass clefs.
MUS-134	Ear Training and Sightsinging II	Continuation of MUS 133 involving more complex rhythmic, melodic, and harmonic dictation and sightsinging.
MUS-135	Women's Chorale I	Treble voiced choral ensemble; students work on music culminating in public performance. Not limited to women but is only for singers with treble voices.
MUS-136	Women's Chorale II	Second enrollment of MUS 135.
MUS-137	Women's Chorale III	Third enrollment of MUS 135.
MUS-138	Women's Chorale IV	Fourth enrollment of MUS 135.
MUS-139	Percussion Class III	Third semester of percussion class.
MUS-140	Percussion Class IV	Fourth semester of Percussion Class.
MUS-141	Show Choir I	Select choral ensemble presenting choreographed numbers from musical theater and contemporary popular music.
MUS-142	Show Choir II	Second enrollment of MUS 141.
MUS-143	Show Choir III	Third enrollment of MUS 141
MUS-144	Show Choir IV	Fourth enrollment of MUS 141.
MUS-145	Jazz Band I	Performance course; students rehearse with semester performance as culmination. Must supply own instrument. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-146	Jazz Band II	Performance course; students rehearse with semester performance as culmination. Must supply own instrument. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-147	Jazz Band III	Performance course; students rehearse with semester performance as culmination. Must supply own instrument. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-148	Jazz Band IV	Performance course; students rehearse with semester performance as culmination. Must supply own instrument. May be repeated for up to 3 credit hours.
MUS-162	English/Italian Diction	Basic study of International Phonetic Alphabet and comprehensive study of rules, phonetics, and techniques of English and Italian diction in performance.
MUS-163	German/French Diction	Basic study of International Phonetic Alphabet and comprehensive study of rules, phonetics, and techniques of German and French diction in performance.
MUS-164	Jazz Improvisation	Explores all aspects of improvisation from beginning to intermediate level. Includes various playing techniques and application of basic theory. Previous playing experience required. Must supply own instrument.
MUS-165	Instrumental Chamber Ensemble I	Performance class; students study music and performance techniques through rehearsals culminating in public performances. Must supply own instrument.
MUS-166	Instrumental Chamber Ensemble II	Second enrollment of MUS 165
MUS-167	Instrumental Chamber Ensemble III	Third enrollment of MUS 165
MUS-175	Concert Band I	Students study music techniques through rehearsals culminating in public performances. Must supply own instrument.
MUS-176	Concert Band II	Second enrollment of MUS 175
MUS-177	Concert Band III	Third enrollment of MUS 175
MUS-178	Concert Band IV	Fourth enrollment of MUS 175
MUS-185	Orchestra I	Preparation and performance techniques through the study of orchestral repertoire with emphasis on rehearsal disciplines and musical interpretations. Final performance at end of the semester. Enrollment subject to instrumentation.
MUS-186	Orchestra II	Second enrollment of MUS 185
MUS-187	Orchestra III	Third enrollment of MUS 185
MUS-188	Orchestra IV	Continuation of MUS 185
MUS-195	Wind Ensemble I	A select 12-20 piece ensemble; students prepare music culminating in public performance.
MUS-196	Wind Ensemble II	Second Enrollment of MUS 195.
MUS-197	Wind Ensemble III	Third enrollment of MUS 195.
MUS-198	Wind Ensemble IV	Fourth enrollment of MUS 195
MUS-210	Music Typography	Introduction to the art of music notation using notation software.
MUS-219	Piano Proficiency III	Intermediate level piano class for music majors who possess a knowledge of all basic rudiments.
MUS-220	Piano Proficiency IV	Continuation of MUS 219 to prepare music majors for piano proficiency exam.
MUS-225	Elements of Conducting	Introduction to baton techniques and elements of interpretation in conducting choral and instrumental music.
MUS-229	History of American Musical Theater I	Study of American musical theater from its origins through Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein. Students taking this course may not receive credit for MUS 113.
MUS-230	History of American Musical Theater II	Study of American musical theater from Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein to the present. Students taking this course may not receive credit for MUS 114.
MUS-231	Music History I	Survey of development of Western music from the ancient Greeks through the Baroque period. More in-depth coverage of art music than MUS 111.
MUS-232	Music History II	Continuation of MUS 231. Survey of music from 1600-1827.
MUS-234	Jazz History	Explores earliest origins of Jazz from Creole roots in Louisiana, big band, swing, cool jazz, bebop, avant-garde, Latin jazz, and fusion. For students planning to major in music. Students taking this course may not receive credit for MUS 112.
MUS-235	Music in the Americas	Survey of music cultures found in the Americas focusing on the imported and indigenous music along with select music such as African-American music and Latin-American music.&nbsp; Appropriate for general students and music students.
MUS-250	Music Audio Production I	Basic background for working principles of audio and audio production in the music industry. Introduction to basic audio production techniques and theory. Topics include: microphones, speakers, mixing console operation, and audio editing. Students will complete projects independently and in small groups.
MUS-251	Music Audio Production II	Expands on recording curriculum explored in Audio 1 by increased focus on fundamentals and stereo recording. Concentration is on multi-track recording and in-depth use of Digital Audio Workstation software.
MUS-259	Music Theater Workshop I	Performance-oriented workshop experience that studies acting styles as applied to a song. Covers various styles and periods of musical theater.
MUS-260	Music Theater Workshop	Performance-oriented workshop experience that studies acting styles as applied to a song. Covers various styles and periods of musical theater.
MUS-264	Jazz Improvisation II	Continuation of concepts and techniques learned in Jazz Improvisation I. Explore stylistic trends and developments of jazz improvisation.
MUS-281	Music Theory III	Continuation of MUS 132. Including secondary functions 1 and 2, modulations, Binary and Ternary Form.
MUS-282	Music Theory IV	Continuation of MUS 281
MUS-283	Ear Training and Sightsinging III	Continuation of MUS 134
MUS-284	Ear Training and Sightsinging IV	Continuation of MUS 283
MUS-285	Woodwind Methods	Prepare to teach woodwind instruments to elementary and middle school level students.&nbsp; Techniques for successful beginning woodwind instruction and performance are studied, along with instructional planning, procedures, and resource materials.&nbsp; Students' teaching and playing competencies will be centered on the flute, clarinet, and saxophone.&nbsp; Students will also become familiar with the oboe and bassoon.
MUS-286	Brass Methods	Prepare to teach brass instruments to elementary and middle school level students.&nbsp; Techniques for successful beginning brass instruction and performance are studied, along with instructional planning, procedures, and resource materials.&nbsp; Students' teaching and playing competencies will be on the trumpet, French horn, trombone, euphonium and tuba.
MUS-287	String Methods	Prepare to teach string instruments to elementary and middle school level students.&nbsp; Techniques for successful beginning string instruction and performance are studied, along with instructional planning, procedures, and resource materials.&nbsp; Students' teaching and playing competencies will be on the violin, viola, cello and bass.
MUS-288	Percussion Methods	Prepare to teach the major instruments found in the percussion family to elementary and middle school level students.&nbsp; Techniques for successful beginning percussion instruction and performance are studied, along with instructional planning, procedures, and resource materials.&nbsp; Students' teaching and playing competencies will be on the major instruments found in the percussion family.
MUS-295	Opera Theater Workshop	A performing ensemble workshop emphasizing training and performance of operatic literature. Musical coaching/rehearsal, staging, stage movement, character development and technical stage training are included.
MUS-299	Sophomore Recital	Solo presentation (with accompaniment) in a recital-type setting of at least 30 minutes.
MVB-101	Trumpet Lessons I	Individual Trumpet Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVB-102	Trumpet Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVB 101.
MVB-103	Trumpet Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVB 101.
MVB-104	Trumpet Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVB 101.
MVB-111	French Horn Lessons I	Individual French Horn Lessons, starting at the appropriate level
MVB-112	French Horn Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVB 111.
MVB-113	French Horn Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVB 111.
MVB-114	French Horn Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVB 111.
MVB-121	Trombone Lessons I	Individual Trombone Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVB-122	Trombone Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVB 121.
MVB-123	Trombone Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVB 121.
MVB-124	Trombone Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVB 121.
MVB-131	Euphonium Lessons I	Individual Euphonium Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVB-132	Euphonium Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVB 131.
MVB-133	Euphonium Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVB 131.
MVB-134	Euphonium Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVB 131.
MVB-141	Tuba Lessons I	Individual Tuba Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVB-142	Tuba Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVB 141.
MVB-143	Tuba Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVB 141.
MVB-144	Tuba Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVB 141.
MVG-101	Guitar-Classical Lessons I	Individual Guitar-Classical Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVG-102	Guitar-Classical Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVG 101.
MVG-103	Guitar-Classical Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVG 101.
MVG-104	Guitar-Classical Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVG 101.
MVG-111	Guitar-Jazz Lessons I	Individual Guitar-Jazz Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVG-112	Guitar-Jazz Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVG 111.
MVG-113	Guitar-Jazz Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVG 111
MVG-114	Guitar-Jazz Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVG 111
MVG-121	Guitar-Bass Lessons I	Individual Guitar-Bass Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVG-122	Guitar-Bass Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVG 121
MVG-123	Guitar-Bass Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVG 121
MVG-124	Guitar-Bass Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVG 121.
MVG-221	Guitar-Bass Lessons V	Fifth enrollment of MUS 121.
MVP-101	Percussion Lessons I	Individual Percussion Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVP-102	Percussion Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVP 101.
MVP-103	Percussion Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVP 101.
MVP-104	Percussion Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVP 101.
MVP-201	Percussion Lessons V	Fifth enrollment of MVP 101.
MVP-202	Percussion Lessons VI	Sixth enrollment of MVP 101.
MVP-203	Percussion Lessons VII	Seventh enrollment of MVP 101.
MVP-204	Percussion Lessons VIII	Eighth enrollment of MVP 101.
MVK-101	Keyboard Lessons I	Individual Keyboard Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVK-102	Keyboard Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVK 101.
MVK-103	Keyboard Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVK 101.
MVK-104	Keyboard Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVK 101.
MVK-111	Organ Lessons I	Individual Organ Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVK-112	Organ Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVK 111.
MVK-113	Organ Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVK 111.
MVK-114	Organ Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVK 111.
MVK-201	Keyboard Lessons V	Fifth enrollment of MVK 101.
MVK-202	Keyboard Lessons VI	Sixth enrollment of MVK 101.
MVK-203	Keyboard Lessons VII	Seventh enrollment of MVK 101.
MVK-204	Keyboard Lessons VIII	Eighth enrollment of MVK 101
MVS-131	Violin Lessons I	Individual Violin Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVS-132	Violin Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVS 131
MVS-133	Violin Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVS 131.
MVS-134	Violin Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVS 131.
MVS-141	Viola Lessons I	Individual Viola Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVS-142	Viola Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVS 141
MVS-143	Viola Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVS 141
MVS-144	Viola Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVS 141
MVS-151	Cello Lessons I	Individual Cello Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVS-152	Cello Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVS 151
MVS-153	Cello Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVS 151
MVS-154	Cello Lessons IV	Fourth Enrollment of MVS 151
MVS-161	Bass Lessons I	Individual Bass Lessons, starting at the appropriate level
MVS-162	Bass Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVS 161
MVS-163	Bass Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVS 161.
MVS-164	Bass Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVS 161.
MVS-231	Violin Lessons V	Fifth enrollment of MVS 131.
MVS-232	Violin Lessons VI	Sixth Enrollment of MVS -131.
MVV-101	Voice Lessons I	Individual Voice Lessons, Starting at the appropriate level.
MVV-102	Voice Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVV 101.
MVV-103	Voice Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVV 101.
MVV-104	Voice Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVV 101.
MVV-201	Voice Lessons V	Fifth enrollment of MVV 101.
MVV-202	Voice Lessons VI	Sixth enrollment of MVV 101.
MVV-203	Voice Lessons VII	Seventh enrollment of MVV 101
MVV-204	Voice Lessons VIII	Eighth enrollment of MVV 101.
MVW-101	Flute/Piccolo Lessons I	Individual Flute/Piccolo Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVW-102	Flute/Piccolo Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVW 101.
MVW-103	Flute/Piccolo Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVW 101
MVW-104	Flute/Piccolo Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVW 101.
MVW-111	Oboe Lessons I	Individual Oboe Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVW-112	Oboe Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVW 111.
MVW-113	Oboe Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVW 111.
MVW-114	Oboe Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVW 111.
MVW-121	Clarinet Lessons I	Individual Clarinet Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVW-122	Clarinet Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVW 121.
MVW-123	Clarinet Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVW 121
MVW-124	Clarinet Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVW 121
MVW-131	Bassoon Lessons I	Individual Bassoon Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVW-132	Bassoon Lessons II	Second enrollment of MBW 131.
MVW-133	Bassoon Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVW 131
MVW-134	Bassoon Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVW 131
MVW-141	Saxophone Lessons I	Individual Saxophone Lessons, starting at the appropriate level.
MVW-142	Saxophone Lessons II	Second enrollment of MVW 141.
MVW-143	Saxophone Lessons III	Third enrollment of MVW 141.
MVW-144	Saxophone Lessons IV	Fourth enrollment of MVW 141
NUR-100	Exploration of Nursing	Exploration of nursing from a broad view: nursing as a profession; educational requirements; advanced degree opportunities; the variety of roles in nursing practice; factors that promote student and professional success; and observation.
NUR-101	Tools for Success in an ADN Program	Key strategies and skills needed to be successful in an RN nursing program. Included time management, note-taking regarding nursing texts, labs, clinicals, videos, listening, critical thinking, and clinical preparation.&nbsp; Attendance is mandatory for all four days to receive a passing grade.
NUR-102	LPN Bridge to ADN Program	LPN Bridge to ADN Program will review fundamentals of nursing as they relate to the role transition from licensed professional nurse to registered nurse. Content will be reviewed including nursing process, professional ethics, interdisciplinary relationships, therapeutic communication, nutrition, pharmacology, assessment, medication administration, sterile technique and medication mathematics.
NUR-103	Nursing of Adult & Children I	Each human being is presented as a unique individual, constantly responding to internal and external stimuli. The nursing process is emphasized as students apply principles of physical, biological, and social sciences. Basic nutrition and pharmacology are introduced. Nursing history and elements of health and disease are presented. Professional ethics and interpersonal relations are integrated throughout the course. Basic concepts of nursing are introduced and basic nursing skills are taught and practice in the nursing lab. The student will learn health assessment techniques, with an emphasis on therapeutic communication.&nbsp;
NUR-104	Nursing of Adults and Children II	Human growth and development is emphasized while studying human adaptive and maladaptive responses to disturbances in nutrition and fluid balance. Illnesses that interfere with these processes throughout the life span are presented with focuses on physiological, psychosocial, and spiritual aspects during each stage of development. Adaptive and maladaptive responses to stressors that interfere with psychosocial homeostasis are presented. Current treatment modalities are emphasized with a historical overview of psychiatric therapy.
NUR-107	Pharmacology	Elective on-line course that presents concepts of drug actions and how they affect various body systems and disease conditions. Provides concentrated, intentional opportunity for students to learn pharmacological principles and how they apply to care for humans.
NUR-113	Introduction to Nursing Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multimedia, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and lab staff assistance.&nbsp; Included: vital signs, hygiene and medical asepsis, assessment, mobility, medication administration, sterile technique, dressing changes and fundamental medication math.
NUR-114	Nursing of Adults and Children I Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multi-media, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and lab staff assistance.&nbsp; Included: urinary catheterization, intravenous fluids administration, nasogastric insertion, enteral feeding, ostomy care, medication administration synthesis and intermediate medication math.
NUR-123	Introduction to Nursing Clinical	Students care for patients in the nursing home and/or hospital/health care center. Ten clinical laboratory hours per week.
NUR-124	Nursing of Adults and Children I Clinical	Students plan, administer, and evaluate nursing care to patients in pediatric, geriatric, medical and surgical units. Observation of developmental stages is provided in schools, hospitals/health care centers, and nursing homes. Thirteen clinical laboratory hours per week.
NUR-200	Registered First Nurse Assistant	This AORN-approved class follows the core curriculum for the RN First Assistant. Six credit hours are awarded upon completion of the course. Three credits are earned through classroom/ theory presentation and internship. For eligibility requirements and registration packet, call (636) 922-8280.
NUR-220	RNFA Certification Clinical	Supervised practice by surgeon mentor during actual surgical procedures. Documentation of procedures and activities is required. Must meet minimum clock hours to meet regulating guidelines.
NUR-253	Nursing of Adults and Children III	The individual is considered as a part of a social unit, the family. The development of sexual roles is presented and the physical, psychosocial and ethno cultural factors that influence it are considered. Adaptive and maladaptive responses of the mother, the neonate and other family members to pregnancy and the birth process are examined. The human body's responses to interferences with oxygenation of tissue are studied as it relates to respiratory, hematological and cardiac systems. Psychological adaptive and maladaptive responses to change in family dynamics and health conditions are considered.
NUR-254	Nursing of Adults and Children IV	The patient with problems related to mobility, perception, metabolism and body defense mechanisms is discussed, with emphasis on nurse and patient functioning on a health illness continuum.&nbsp; Included: assessment and neurological, endocrine, integumentary, musculoskeletal and sensory systems.&nbsp; Professional development is continued, as nursing leadership, ethical aspects of nursing care and the legal-professional role of the nurse are discussed.
NUR-263	Nursing of Adults and Children III Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multi-media, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and lab staff assistance.&nbsp; Included: peripheral intravenous therapy, central venous catheters, respiratory care, ECG basics, blood product administration and advanced medication mathematics.
NUR-264	Nursing of Adults and Children IV Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multi-media, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and lab staff assistance.&nbsp; Included: communication in the health care setting and prioritizing,&nbsp; delegation and comprehensive medication mathematics.
NUR-273	Nursing of Adults and Children III Clinical	Students plan, administer, and care for patients in labor and delivery, postpartum, and nursery units as well as in medical and surgical units in area hospital/health care facilities. Twelve clinical laboratory hours per week.
NUR-274	Nursing of Adults and Children IV Clinical	Gaining independence, students plan, administer, and evaluate total nursing care to patients and begin supervising others giving care. Emphasis is placed upon the nurse and patient functioning in a homeostatic milieu, with consideration of physical, psychosocial, ethnocultural and spiritual aspects of development. A 5-week preceptorship provides transition between student and practitioner. Sixteen clinical laboratory hours per week.
OTA-100	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy Assistant I	Acceptance in the OTA Program. Introduction to occupational therapy, including its history, philosophy, and practice base in relation to treatment in psychosocial dysfunction, physical disabilities, and developmental pediatrics. Theories guiding occupational therapy practice, values and ethics of the profession. Exploration of oral and written communication skills. Overview of occupational therapy process and the OTA role in screening, assessment, treatment planning, treatment implementation, and discharge. Examination of role of occupational therapy personnel in variety of treatment settings, including concepts related to client-practitioner interaction and communication and the importance of collaboration with clients, caregivers, and other health care professionals. Level I Fieldwork opportunities to apply basic occupational therapy principles and techniques and observe roles of OTs and other allied health professionals. Four lecture hours and three hours per week. Level I fieldwork beginning week six for six weeks.
OTA-102	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy Assistant II	Introduction of beginning skills in occupational therapy treatment in psychosocial dysfunction. Major theories guiding occupational therapy practice in psychosocial treatment and their application to sensory motor, psychosocial, and cognitive development through the life span. Emphasis on group leadership and facilitation, development of communication and observation skills, and use of self as a therapeutic modality. Examination of issues related to death and dying. Exploration of occupational therapy process of assessment, treatment planning and treatment implementation and discontinuation of intervention in relation to psychosocial practice issues and concerns. Discussion of concepts of psychosocial intervention with other areas of practice. Role of the OTA in prevention, health maintenance, and quality of life of the individual with psychosocial dysfunction. Three lecture hours.<em>Spring</em>
OTA-103	Adaptive Activities I	Acceptance into the OTA program. Use of activities in occupational therapy with primary emphasis on the performance area of play/leisure including, those that address sensory motor, cognitive, and psychosocial performance components. Introduction to common therapeutic media used in OT practice. Introduction to acquisition of basic skills, concepts of activity analysis, instruction of individuals and groups, problem-solving, equipment maintenance, and cost and supply factors. Four lab hours per week. <i>Fall</i>
OTA-104	Adaptive Activities II	Continuation of use of activities in OT with a primary emphasis on the performance area of work/productive activities that address sensory motor, cognitive, and psychosocial performance components. Activities, strategies, and techniques that emphasize the use of purposeful activities and occupation to enhance role function. Introduction to standardized and non-standardized evaluations using activity based format. Development of more advanced skills that focus on grading and adapting purposeful activities and instructing individuals and groups for therapeutic interventions. One lecture hour per week.
OTA-105	Fundamentals of OTA I	Introduction to occupational therapy, including history, philosophy and foundational skills required for OT practice. Context is offered<br />based on the fundamental skills needed in psychosocial dysfunction, physical and cognitive dysfunction, and pediatrics using the<br />Occupational Therapy Practice Framework. Theories guiding OT practice, values, and ethics of the profession discussed.
OTA-106	Fundamentals of OTA II	Build on foundation skills needed for OT practice and focuses on fundamental assessment and intervention skills in occupational therapy in<br />psychosocial, physical, cognitive and pediatric dysfunction. Understanding of the OT process of assessment, treatment planning and<br />implementation, transitions and discontinuation of OT services is addressed using the OTPF as a guide.
OTA-112	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy Assistant II Lab	Lab course complement to OTA 102. Provides hands-on laboratory experience, reinforcing material covered in the lecture component. Two hours per week.
OTA-114	Adaptive Activities II Lab	Lab course complement to OTA 104. Provides hands-on laboratory experience, reinforcing material covered in the lecture component. Two hours per week.
OTA-115	Kinesiology/Functional A & P	Foundation in the biological, physical, and physiological application in the practice of occupational therapy. Students will demonstrate understanding and knowledge of the structure and function of the human body including the musculoskeletal, nervous, cardiovascular, pulmonary, and endocrine systems. Students will apply knowledge for foundational practice skills such as ROM, assessment of muscle control, transfers, vital signs, body mechanics, client positioning and safe handling techniques.
OTA-116	Applied A & P in Health & Disease	Continuation of the foundational skills practiced in previous coursework. Students use of meaningful activities as defined by OTPF focusing on performance areas that specifically address performance skills such as sensory motor, cognitive and psychosocial components. Assessment and intervention strategies and techniques that emphasize the use of purposeful activities and occupation to enhance role function will be the focus of practical application of these skills.
OTA-125	Occupation Based Activities I	Introduction of occupation-based activities and the essential role occupation plays in the delivery of occupational therapy services. Primary emphasis is on the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework and its application in activity analysis and implementation of services.
OTA-126	Occupation Based Activities II	Builds on foundational skills and concepts of occupation-based activities and the essential role occupation plays in the delivery of occupational therapy services. The Occupational Therapy Practice Framework and its focus on activity analysis is the basis of practical application for assessment and intervention in clinical and nonclinical settings.
OTA-203	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy III	Occupational therapy process related to physical dysfunction evaluation and treatment procedures including self-care, therapeutic exercise, home management, use of adaptive equipment, work and play-leisure skills. Introduction to remediation in movement difficulties and practiced in the laboratory. Administration of standardized and non-standardized tests and evaluations, and need for demonstrating service competency. Activity analysis, documentation, formulation of goals and objectives, collaboration with occupational therapist on treatment implementation, assessment/ reassessment, and termination of treatment. Level I fieldwork introduces application of occupational therapy procedures under close supervision. Three lecture hours. Three hours Level 1 Fieldwork beginning week four for nine weeks or one week of 30 hours.
OTA-204	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy IV	Evaluation and treatment of pediatric population appropriate to role of OTA including development and perceptual motor skills, self-care, design and use of adaptive equipment, and play/leisure issues are explored in relation to normal sensory motor, psychosocial, and cognitive development. Interventions using age appropriate activities. Examination of cultural factors on treatment and treatment implementation, including the importance of collaboration and inclusion of family, care givers, and others in the OT process. Laboratory experiences arranged at on-site daycare center for typically developing and special needs children. Field trip to be arranged. Three lecture hours.
OTA-205	Fundamentals of OTA III	Builds on foundational and fundamental skills needed for entry-level occupational therapy practice related to psychosocial, physical, cognitive and pediatrics. Understanding of entry-level competency skills and implementation of OT treatment for demonstrating service competency is emphasized.
OTA-206	OTA Capstone	Final phase of professional development and cullminating experiences for students in the Occupational Therapy Assistant Program. Provides<br />an opportunity for reflection on the integration of academic coursework and fieldwork experiences and prepares the OTA student to enter the<br />professional realm.
OTA-207	Health and Disease	Overview of disease conditions commonly seen for treatment by occupational therapy practitioners. Etiology, symptoms and physical and psychological reactions to these conditions. Basic influences contributing to healthy living. Includes medical terminology and procedures commonly used in occupational therapy.
OTA-209	Health Occupations Seminar	Current trends and issues in the health care system, including legal and ethical components of practice, cultural diversity; OTR-OTA role delineation; supervision; documentation to ensure accountability and reimbursement requirements; community resources; multi-disciplinary approach to treatment; and employability skills. Examination of OTA as director of activity program in relation to assessment, treatment planning, and treatment implementation needs. Issues of continuing professional competency, research and program development, involvement in professional organizations and political advocacy. Exploration of quality assurance and measurement of treatment outcomes as well as credential requirements, compliance with regulations, and the use of non-professional personnel. Two lecture/seminar hours per week.
OTA-210	Occupational Therapy Assistant Practicum I	Development of professional skills through supervised application of treatment principles. Fieldwork experience in the treatment of geriatric clients, physically disabled children or adults, or clients with psychosocial dysfunction. Student under direct supervision from an occupational therapy practitioner in all aspects of occupational therapy practice. Requires completion of full time caseload as defined by accreditation standards and the assigned facility. Specific objectives developed by the fieldwork site educator in collaboration with OTA academic fieldwork coordinator. Students are required to complete two full time practicums usually of eight weeks duration.
OTA-211	Occupational Therapy Assistant Practicum II	Development of professional skills through supervised application of treatment principles. Fieldwork experience in the treatment of geriatric clients, physically disabled children or adults, or clients with psychosocial dysfunction. Student under direct supervision from an occupational therapy practitioner in all aspects of occupational therapy practice. Requires completion of full time caseload as defined by accreditation standards and the assigned facility. Specific objectives developed by the fieldwork site educator in collaboration with OTA academic fieldwork coordinator. Students are required to complete two full time practicums usually of eight weeks duration.
OTA-213	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy III Lab	Lab course complement OTA 203. Provides hands-on laboratory experience, reinforcing material covered in the lecture component. Two hours per week.
OTA-214	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy IV Lab	Lab course complement to OTA 204. Provides hands-on laboratory experience, reinforcing material covered in the lecture component. Two hours per week.
OTA-215	Professional Development/Clinical Competency	Builds on foundational and fundamentals skills needed for entry-level competency. Provides specific hands-on laboratory experience focused on demonstrating entry-level competency through student presentations, lab practical examinations and collaborative activities which reinforce foundational and fundamental skills previously practiced.
OTA-217	Health & Disease Lab	Lab course complement to OTA 207.&nbsp; Provides hands-on laboratory experience, reinforcing material covered in the lecture component. <i>Spring</i>
OTA-218	Adaptive Living Skills	Skills required for designing and fabricating adaptive equipment. Adaptive activities with a primary emphasis on performance area of activities of daily living as applied to seating, positioning, splinting, functional tasks, functional mobility, and environmental barriers. Communication with clients, families, care givers, and other health-care professionals in relation to benefits and use of adaptive equipment, its function, care, and precautions. Four hours per week.
OTA-225	Occupation Based Activities III	Builds on fundamental competency skills and concepts of entry-level practice using occupation-based activities and the essential role occupation plays in the delivery of occupational therapy services. The Occupational Therapy Practice Framework and the AOTA Fieldwork Performance Evaluation will be the basis of practical application for understanding entry-level competency in various clinical and non-clinical settings.
OTA-226	OTA Practicum I	Level II Fieldwork is the opportunity to practice in the field under direct supervision of a clinical fieldwork educator. Practice emphasis<br />uses the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework as it relates to documentation, facilitation of activities of daily living performance, ROM/MMT, positioning, splinting, functional activities, functional mobility/transfers, treatment planning and addressing environmental barriers.
OTA-227	OTA Practicum II	Level II Fieldwork is the opportunity to practice in the field under direct supervision of a clinical fieldwork educator. Practice emphasis<br />uses the Occupational Therapy Practice Framework as it relates to documentation, facilitation of activities of daily living performance, ROM/MMT, positioning, splinting, functional activities, functional mobility/transfers, treatment planning and addressing environmental barriers.
OTA-298	Occupational Therapy Capstone	Completion of program-culminating experiences for the Occupational Therapy Assistant Associate's degree. Provides an opportunity for application and integration of academic course work into fieldwork experiences. Requires reflection of how the role of occupational therapy and the occupational therapy assistant are demonstrated and delineated in each fieldwork facility. Allows for problem solving approach for adjusting to various work sites and handling feedback from supervisors. Requirements for college standardized testing, state licensure and national certification examination are reviewed. Completes development of professional resume and cover letter for employment.
PHL-101	Introduction to Philosophy	Introduction to philosophical inquiry and historically important philosophical ideas discussed by classical and/or modern philosophers. Topics may include the nature of love, the foundation of ethical action, the nature and limits of knowledge, the essence of truth, and the meaning of technology in contemporary culture.
PHL-102	Introduction to Logic	Study of techniques and methods for identifying, classifying, clarifying, and evaluating various kinds of reasoning and related uses of language.
PHL-160	Ethics	Introductory survey of classical and contemporary theories in field of ethics. Questions considered regarding ideal moral life, nature of good and evil, principles for distinguishing right from wrong, and ethical relativism versus objectivism. Discusses selected moral dilemmas of modern living.
PHL-201	World Religion	Introduction to basic doctrines and stories of seven major religions of the world: Hinduism, Buddhism, Confucianism, Taoism, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
PHL-260	Reason and Religion	Introduction to Western philosophy of religion. Topics include the character and reliability of religious experience, arguments for and against God?s existence, the meaningfulness of religious language, the problem of evil, and life after death.
PHL-290	Topics in Philosophy	Seminar style course reflecting specializations in fields of philosophy. Titles may include: The Modern and the Postmodern, Democracy and Philosophy, Phenomenology and Existentialism, and Aesthetics.
PHE-102	Concepts:  Drugs	Organized to provide a measure of sequential development and interrelatedness of subjects pertaining to psychoactive drugs and drug-taking behaviors. Sections include overview of drug problems in America, examination of effects of various drugs such as alcohol, cocaine, hallucinogens, prescription drugs, and others on the human body, and insight into drug abuse prevention efforts employed in variety of settings.
PHE-103	Concepts:  Health	Study of vital health principles and problems. Personal and community health issues discussed. Overall objective to favorably influence habits, attitudes, and knowledge related to individual and community health. Offered on campus and Web.
PHE-105	First Aid/Safety	First aid practices to give appreciation of good safety habits. Practical application of basic first aid methods. CPR certification included.
PHE-106	Personal Wellness	Focuses on development of positive lifestyle by using combination of classroom/activity. Experiences include concepts of fitness, lifetime sports, stress management techniques, leisure well being, contemporary threats, and nutrition. Completion allows current SCC students to continue use of the SCC Fitness Center.
PHE-107	Selected Health Topics	Variable content designed to develop positive health practices for a lifetime of wellness. Topics vary with interest and need. Limit of 2 credit hours (four topics) may be used toward graduation credit.
PHE-108	Stress Management	Explores the nature of stress and the physiological and psychological effects upon the body due to prolonged stress responses. Short and long term somatic and behavioral techniques for applied stress control (i.e. exercise, nutrition, relaxation, visualization, meditation, goal setting, and time management) will be examined.
PHE-109	Nutrition for Weight Management	Understanding the role of nutritional quality and quantity of food intake, exercise and fitness levels and how they relate to body image, eating disorders, and obesity.
PHE-112	Beginning Swimming	Learn to swim. Covers water safety and water familiarity. Practices of basic strokes.
PHE-113	Volleyball	Basic rules, techniques, and safety. Activity class with emphasis on skill building through participation. Appropriate for beginners and experienced players.
PHE-114	Dance Aerobics I	Development of fitness and aerobic capacity by performing simple dance steps and other moves to music. Choreographed exercise. A written component will be included.
PHE-115	Physical Fitness	Improvement of overall fitness by combinations of activities.
PHE-118	Fitness Center I	Orientation to selectorized weight equipment and cardiovascular equipment to utilize all major muscle groups. Based upon fitness assessment, students are taught how to monitor personal progress under instructor supervision. Completion of the course allows student to use the Fitness Center during open hours without instructor supervision.
PHE-121	Step and Muscle Conditioning	Combines step aerobics and free weights. A written component may be required.
PHE-122	Yoga	Based on the principles of Hatha Yoga movements, students will increase in physical fitness, strength, flexibility, and balance. Breathing and meditation techniques will be used to assist the student in making the mind/body/spirit connection so yoga can be incorporated into daily life.
PHE-124	Pilates	Emphasis on exercises for the core muscles of the body by using balls, weighted bars, body weight postural cues, and breathing techniques to challenge muscles. Follows the Stotts method.
PHE-125	Walking Fitness	Principles of fitness development are developed using the activity of walking. Strength and endurance are targeted and an understanding of walking activity to weight management is emphasized.
PHE-126	Boot Camp	The total body is targeted by toning and strengthening the major muscles of the upper and lower body while challenging the cardiovascular system through fast-paced cardiovascular exercises.
PHE-127	Cardio Core Strength	A combination of Yoga, Pilates, and weighted fitness activities on the stability ball to challenge and develop cardio and muscle strength.
PHE-128	Disc Golf	Disc Golf is a lifetime recreational game suitable for youth to senior citizens. It is played on disc golf courses using elevated baskets as holes, tee areas and various weight flying discs as drivers and putters. The structure of the game is the same as golf. The objective is to throw at each hole using the fewest attempts and is completed when the putt lands in the basket. The score is recorded and players move to the next tee to attempt the next hole. The player with the lowest score at the end of the course, wins the game.
PHE-129	Pickleball	Pickleball is a lifetime recreational court game suitable for youth to senior citizens. It is played inside or out on a court using paddles, balls and a low net. The structure of the game court is the same size as a doubles badminton court.
PHE-130	Beginning Rock Climbing	Safety and rock climbing techniques using indoor artificial cliff. All climbing done while wearing safety harness.
PHE-133	Beginning Cardio Kickboxing	Muscle conditioning and cardiovascular endurance gained through martial arts and boxing moves. Choreographed to music. Written component may be required.
PHE-135	Ballet Conditioning	Principles of fitness are developed using various ballet conditioning exercises. Strength and endurance are targeted as well as an understanding of body alignment and muscle balance are emphasized.
PHE-137	Scuba	Safety and scuba diving techniques both in classroom and indoor pool. Course does not earn certification, but students can earn certification immediately afterward by paying for and passing open-water check-out dive. Students should know they might be asked to get further approval from a physician before being allowed to participate.
PHE-140	Introduction to Dance	Historical overview of dance as social and artistic form of expression with emphasis on understanding contemporary dance. Covers importance of dance in American society. No dance training required. Lecture and activity components.
PHE-141	Stretch and Strengthen	Stretching and strengthening exercises from dance world appropriate for dancers and sports enthusiasts. A written component may be required.
PHE-143	Tap Dance I	Basic steps of tap technique.  Tap combinations will develop an understanding of coordination, rhythmic variations, and performance skills.  Tap shoes are required.
PHE-144	Modern Dance I	Basic movement course emphasizing beginning and essential elements of dance. Explores technique and terminology. Excellent course for beginning dancers, theater students, and those who wish to teach creative movement or dance.
PHE-145	Jazz Dance I	Jazz techniques designed to give a firm grasp of basic movement, musicality, and strength.
PHE-146	Modern Dance II	Applies principles of dance techniques to performance movement and various modern dance techniques. Also good for experienced dancers trying modern dance.
PHE-147	Jazz Dance II	Techniques and movements developed further to facilitate performance ability or just for fun.
PHE-160	Golf	Safety, rules, course etiquette, grip, stance, and swing. Time spent on practice putting green, driving range, and in actual play.
PHE-165	Current Topics:  Selected Activities	Variable content to develop lifetime skills in sports, fitness, and/or leisure activities. Activities vary every eight weeks, reflecting newest trends. Same activity may be taken no more than twice for graduation credit.
PHE-204	Introduction to Recreation and Leisure	Introductory exploration of the recreation and leisure industry, including its history and philosophy.&nbsp; Students will explore the scope, values, professional responsibilities and career opportunities of the field.
PHE-205	Foundations of Physical Education, Health and Sport	Introductory professional course for those exploring the fields of &nbsp;physical education, health and sport. Designed to provide opportunities to explore history, scope, values, professional responsibilities, and career opportunities.
PHE-206	Foundations of Sport Management	The course is designed to introduce students to the field of sport management. Students will be exposed to areas of within the sport management profession which include human resources management, ethics, law, facility management, marketing, economics, and finance and event management. Students will also be introduced to academic and career opportunity in the sport management profession.
PHE-208	Outdoor Recreation and Leadership	An introduction to outdoor recreation.&nbsp; Identifies and demonstrate an understanding of the value, meaning and benefits of outdoor recreation experience.&nbsp; Includes outdoor adventure leadership experiences.&nbsp; Natural resources, state and federal agencies, governmental and private-sector impacts will be explored as well as outdoor activity and safety skills attained.
PHE-211	Tennis (1)</h4>																								
PHE-212	Advanced Physical Fitness	Based on fitness test results, activities are presented in high intensity interval training style using a variety of challenges with or without equipment.
PHE-213	Circuit Training	Muscle strengthening using series of exercise machines.
PHE-214	Racquetball	Game played on indoor court using racquet and hard rubber ball. Eye protection recommended.
PHE-215	Step Aerobics	Develops fitness and aerobic capacity by stepping on and off small raised platform repeatedly. Written component may be required.
PHE-216	Muscle Conditioning	Muscle strengthening using available techniques and materials. Written component may be required.
PHE-218	Fitness Center II	Continued use of selectorized weight equipment and cardiovascular equipment upon review of individual progress in Fitness Center I. Exploration of various fitness variables such as Body Mass Index, body fat analysis, strength levels, and flexibility range will help each to understand fitness level and develop personal program. These activities fulfill the written component.
PHE-220	Dance Aerobics II	Continuation of PHE 114. Challenge will include more complicated patterns and higher intensity work level. Written component may be required.
PHE-221	Self-Defense I	Unarmed response to dangerous situations using basic fundamentals of defense. Equal time given to mental preparedness and emotional coping with acts of violence. Flexibility and physical conditioning as it applies to self defense. May require written component.
PHE-222	Beginning Tae Kwon Do	Basic instruction in group setting by master of this ancient form of discipline and self-defense. Written component may be required.
PHE-230	Intermediate Rock Climbing	Continuation of PHE 130.
PHE-231	Self-Defense II	Follow-up class to Self Defense I. More advanced situational responses utilizing fundamental skills learned in PHE 221. May require written component.
PHE-232	Intermediate Tae Kwon Do	Continuation of PHE 222. Written component may be required.
PHE-233	Intermediate Cardio Kickboxing	Continuation of PHE 133. Muscle conditioning and cardiovascular endurance gained through martial arts and boxing moves. Choreographed to music. Written component may be required.
PHE-240	Creative Dance for Children	For preschool and elementary teachers; curriculum planning using appropriate dance for children at several stages of motor development. Techniques emphasize self-expression of children as they learn to move and move to learn.
PHE-250	History and Philosophy of Physical Education and Sport	History and philosophy of physical education and sport from ancient civilization to the 21st century. Explores changing thought regarding the physical body and the development of physical education.
PHE-251	Coaching Principles	Seminar course presenting important principles of coaching sports for novice and veteran coaches. Emphasizes planning, organization, teaching, curriculum design, and risk management. Students completing the course will be eligible to earn coaching certification through the American Sport Education Program (AESEP). Spring and Summer.
PHE-252	Nutrition for Sports Performance	Concept and components of nutrition as it relates to physical activity, exercise, and the athlete. A personalized sports specific nutrition action plan will be developed.
PHE-270	Sociological Aspects of Physical Education and Sport	Introduction to diverse aspects of sports and sports studies. Study of how culture, values, society, and physical education/sport influence one another. Applied issues include legal, political, economic, cultural, and educational aspects of physical education and sport programs in schools and society.
PHE-275	Psychological Aspects of Physical Education and Sport	Introduction to applied sport psychology, mental aspects of sports, and contemporary performance enhancement techniques. Includes theory and practice of sport psychology with mental aspects of training and competition, mental training techniques for psychomotor performance, and basic issues of performance psychology. Study of the following aspects of psychology as they influence performance: learning, practice, motivation, anxiety, perception, motor control, social facilitation, cohesion, retention, transfer, reinforcement, and leadership.
PHE-280	Women's Fast-Pitch Varsity Softball	Enrollment limited to members of varsity team.
PHE-282	Women's Fast Pitch Varsity Softball II	Women's Fast-Pitch Varsity Softball II is limited to second year members of the varsity team. Credit awarded for varsity athletes during required practices/game season.
PHE-283	Women's Varsity Soccer	Limited to members of the women's varsity soccer team. Awards credit for varsity athletes during the required practices/game season.
PHE-284	Women's Varsity Soccer II	Continuation of PHE 283.  Women's Varsity Soccer II is limited to second year members of the varsity team.  Credit awarded for varsity athletes during the required practices/game season.
PHE-290	Men's Varsity Baseball	Enrollment limited to members of varsity team.
PHE-292	Men's Varsity Baseball II	Continuation of PHE 290.  Men's Varsity Baseball II is limited to second year members of the varsity team.  Credit awarded for varsity athletes during required practices/game season.
PHE-293	Men's Varsity Soccer	Limited to members of the men's varsity soccer team. Awards credit for varsity athletes during required practices/game season.
PHE-294	Men's Varsity Soccer II	Continuation of PHE 293.  Men's Varsity Soccer II is limited to second year members of the varsity team.  Credit awarded for varsity athletes during required practices/game season.
PHY-105	Environmental Geology	Examination of geologic processes and hazards that influence human activities and the geologic aspects of pollution and waste-disposal.
PHY-107	Environmental Geology Laboratory	Exercises focus on environmental and social issues relevant to environmental problems and the effects of human interaction in geologic processes.
PHY-111	Introduction to Physical Science	Introduces the basics in a variety of scientific disciplines including classical (Newtonian) physics, energy, matter and heat, wave behavior, electricity and magnetism, modern physics (the atom and nucleus), geology, and astronomy. Basic high school math/algebra is utilized in portions of this course.
PHY-113	Introduction to Physical Science Laboratory	Laboratory reinforces topics discussed in Physical Science lecture (PHY 111) by utilizing hands-on experimentation.
PHY-125	Introduction to Physical Geology	Introduces a basic understanding of topics in physical geology including the unifying theory of plate tectonics, discussions of Earth materials (rocks and minerals), internal processes (volcanism, earthquakes), surface processes (surface and ground water, weathering, erosion), and geologic time.&nbsp; Campus outings will be incorporated to emphasize Missouri geology.
PHY-127	Introduction to Physical Geology Laboratory	Laboratory reinforces topics discussed in Physical Geology lecture (PHY 125) by utilizing practical experimentation and observations.
PHY-130	Astronomy	Nonmathematical introduction to astronomy designed primarily for non-science majors. Topics include the history and cultural impact of astronomy, properties of solar system, and stellar structures. Supplemented by occasional hours of evening observation.
PHY-131	Astronomy Laboratory	Analysis and interpretation of astronomical data and observations with telescopes. No prior knowledge of astronomy assumed.
PHY-145	Historical Geology	Introduces an understanding of the history of Earth"s development including identification and interpretation of sediments, sedimentary rocks and rock structures, environments of deposition, major tectonic and depositional events of North America, and the evolution of life.&nbsp; Campus outings will be incorporated to emphasize Missouri geology.
PHY-147	Historical Geology Laboratory	Exercises in interpreting Earth's history by examination of sediments, sedimentary rocks, geologic time, and identification and taxonomic classification of fossils.
PHY-150	General Physics I	Survey of kinematics, dynamics, energy, momentum, rotational motion, fluids, and thermodynamics. Non-calculus in approach. Three hours of lecture-recitation and two hours of laboratory per week.
PHY-151	General Physics II	Begins with wave motion, but emphasis on electricity and magnetism. Treats geometric and wave optics. Non-calculus in approach. Three hours of lecture-recitation and two hours of laboratory per week.
PHY-153	General Physics I Laboratory	Experimental component of PHY 150.
PHY-154	General Physics II Laboratory	Experimental component for PHY 151.
PHY-250	Engineering Physics I	Calculus-based course that teaches fundamentals of mechanics, heat and sound. First of a two-semester sequence required for physical sciences and engineering degrees.
PHY-251	Engineering Physics II	A calculus-based course that teaches that fundamentals of electricity, magnetism and optics. Second in a two-semester sequence required for physical sciences and engineering degrees.
PHY-290	Undergraduate Research	Introduction to research techniques and methods used in scientific experimentation. Summer
POL-101	American Government	Basic concepts of political science with major emphasis on origin, principles, organization, and nature of American federal system and its politics. POL 101 complies with provisions of Section 170.011 RsMo.
POL-102	State and Local Government	Examines structure, functions, and operation of American state and local government within context of federalism. POL 102 complies with provisions of Section 170.011 RsMo.
POL-201	International Relations	Study of factors shaping relationships among nations with emphasis upon developing nations and economic, political and environmental issues.
POL-210	Comparative Politics	Analysis of ideologies, political cultures, and governmental structures of several different countries. Political systems of variety of nations chosen for study.
POL-220	Middle Eastern Politics	Survey of Middle Eastern countries as well as regional issues and conflicts. Explores political development of the region, including discussions of Islam, nationalism, and international intervention.
POL-255	European Politics and Cultures	Field course about European politics, history, and cultures in the context of a study tour. Explores the history of Europe and future of the European and future of the European Union through readings, films, writing assignments, and other activities. Among cultural issues, deals with the questions of what is ?Europe.? Specific course objectives outlined in learning agreement with the instructor.
POL-280	Modern Britain	An introduction to the major aspects of political/social life in modern Britain: social stratification, the British political infrastructure, and dealing with published materials on British socio-political issues.
POL-296	Political Science Internship	Students placed in participatory position in government office or community organization. Requires research paper relating to some aspect of internship.
POL-299	Topics in Political Science	Exploration of one topic selected by department. Introduction to research techniques and seminar approved as integral part of scholarship.
NPN-100	Personal and Vocational Concepts	Role of LPN in relationship to other members of health care team is presented. Includes nursing history, professional ethics, and interpersonal relations in today's health care setting.
NPN-101	Fundamentals of Nursing	Emphasis is on the nursing process as students apply principles of physical, biological, and social sciences. Introduction of basic nutrition and pharmacology is included. Elements of health and disease and basic concepts of nursing are presented.
NPN-102	Maternal-Child Nursing	Family centered approach to pregnancy, birth, and adaptation to extrauterine life is presented. Stressors involved in labor and delivery, human sexuality and its role in growth and development, diseases common to the pediatric client are explored. The impact of psychosocial, physical, and spiritual stressors, as well as common issues and problems encountered in individual, family, and community living are presented. Environmental and social health factors as related to appropriate developmental stages are discussed.
NPN-111	Fundamentals of Nursing Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multi-media, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and faculty assistance. Skills included are: vital signs, hygiene and medical and surgical asepsis, partial ongoing assessment (shift assessment), mobility and medication administration.
NPN-112	Maternal-Child Nursing Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multi-media, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and faculty assistance. Skills included are: sterile technique, dressing changes, urinary elimination, pediatric care and obstetrical care.
NPN-121	Fundamentals of Nursing Clinical	Students care for patients in nursing home, health care center, or hospital for a total of 80 clinical hours. Administration of medications is a part of clinical experience. Included in clinical hours is one hour for post conference for each day of clinical experience.
NPN-151	Medical Surgical Nursing I	Emphasis on human growth and development while studying human adaptive and maladaptive responses to disturbances in nutrition and fluid balance, gastrointestinal, and other body systems. Presents illnesses that interfere with these processes throughout life span with focuses on physiological, psychological, psychosocial, and spiritual aspects during each stage of development.
NPN-152	Medical Surgical Nursing II	Continuation of study of adaptive and maladaptive responses to internal and external stressors that interfere with wellness and require nursing care. Includes beginning management as well as disturbances in endocrine, reproductive, and other body systems. Presents illnesses that interface with these processes throughout the life span with focus on physiological, psychological, psychosocial, and spiritual aspects during each stage of development.
NPN-161	Medical Surgical Nursing I Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multi-media, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and faculty assistance. Skills included are: peripheral intravenous therapy, nasogastric insertion, central venous catheters, enteral feedings and ostomy care.
NPN-162	Medical Surgical Nursing II Laboratory	Students gain comprehensive knowledge and ability to safely and accurately perform nursing skills in a safe learning environment using multi-media, textbooks, self-direction, demonstrations and faculty assistance. Included: tracheostomy care and respiratory suctioning.
NPN-171	Medical Surgical Nursing I Clinical	Students plan, administer, and evaluate nursing care to patients in both acute and extended care facilities. Observation experiences provided in operating room, recovery room, emergency room, and other hospital settings. Included in clinical hours is one post conference hour, for each day of clinical experience. A total of 182 clinical hours.
NPN-172	Medical Surgical Nursing II Clinical	Students learn beginning management skills to plan, administer, and evaluate nursing care to patients. Precepted hours in a health care facility are included. Clinical hours total are 112.
PSY-101	Introduction to Psychology	Examination of behavioral, cognitive, psychoanalytic, humanistic, and biological viewpoints in psychology. Includes learning principles and applications, perception, motivation, emotions, stress, psychobiology, personality, abnormal behavior, and approaches to therapy.
PSY-201	Child Psychology	Study of human development from conception to adolescence, emphasizing both current and historical approaches to research and theory, genetic and environmental influences on development, and sequence and timing of physical, mental, and personality development throughout years of childhood.
PSY-210	Human Growth and Development	Survey of basis of human growth and development. Review of emotional, mental, physical, and social needs of children, adolescents, and adults. Analysis of multiple factors that influence and shape behavior and personality.
PSY-215	Adolescent Psychology	Introduction to physical, mental, personality, and social developments unique to adolescence. Focus mainly on factors influencing normal development, but some abnormal behaviors discussed. Biological, psychological, cultural, and historical perspectives considered.
PSY-216	Abnormal Psychology	Survey of abnormal/deviant behavior, including causes and theories of anxiety disorders, psychoses, mental retardation, drug abuse, sexual disorders, criminal behavior, and other selected topics. Includes discussion of diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of these disorders.
PSY-220	Personality Theories	Study of major theories of personality with emphasis on developmental influence and integration of behavior. Theories surveyed represent dynamic, humanistic, cognitive, and behavioral perspectives. Issues such as self-concept, structure of personality, social adjustment, self-management, and maladjustment and therapy are considered within context of each theoretical system.
PSY-225	Psychology of Aging	Examination of psychological processes of aging involving sensory, sexual, intellectual, and personality changes in later life with some attention to common mental disorders in the aged.
PSY-230	Social Psychology	Study of social interaction of individuals and psychological principles and concepts involved in these relationships. Discussion of social perceptions, values, attitudes, prejudice, social influence, group dynamics, leadership, and other group processes.
PSY-240	Introduction to Applied Behavior Analysis	This course is an introduction to applied behavior analysis and the application of behavioral principles and procedures to social challenges. The students will learn about the causes of behavior, basic principles and procedures, and then apply this information to specific content areas or populations.
PSY-250	Drugs and Behavior	This course will address the many issues related to the use of psychoactive drugs. Students will learn about the biopsychological factors that underlie drug use and abuse while they examine specific individual drugs therapeutic psychoactive properties but also how long-term and/or excessive use modifies brain function. Students will learn how to distinguish between the science of psychopharmacology and the unsubstantiated claims of media, advertising and/or drug culture.
PSY-255	Brain and Behavior	&nbsp;
PSY-290	Special Topics in Psychology	Selected studies in the field of psychology. Topics may include: psychological aspects of death, gender, issues in forensic psychology, diversity studies, preparation for marriage, child-rearing practices, and various other issues. Course may be repeated as topics vary by semester.
RDG-080	Spelling I	Individualized course of study presenting words with basic spelling patterns, complicated consonant patterns, and complicated vowel patterns. Word families and rules for addition of word endings included. Programmed learning techniques utilized.
RDG-081	Spelling II	Individualized course of study presenting words with basic spelling patterns, complicated consonant patterns, and complicated vowel patterns. Word families and rules for addition of word endings included. Programmed learning techniques utilized.
RDG-083	Vocabulary Improvement	Individualized course that provides programmed learning to guide through elements of vocabulary development. Includes directed practice in context clues, working with visually similar words and homonyms, and learning commonly misunderstood words.
RDG-084	Introduction to College Vocabulary	Individualized, comprehensive course that provides programmed learning to guide through elements of college-level vocabulary. Includes Latin and Greek derivatives as well as words from fiction, drama, poetry, general literature, psychology, and foreign expressions. Emphasizes communication skills, and includes vocabulary as applied to rhetoric, figures of speech and clear, concise writing.
RDG-085	Reading Fundamentals	This course is designed to help students expand the range of their reading comprehension and vocabulary skills with direct practice.
RDG-090	Vocabulary for College Reading	Directed practice in college vocabulary skills emphasizing communication skills, figures of speech, rhetoric, and clear and concise writing. Course is ESL friendly.
RDG-092	Reading Improvement	Directed practice in college reading skills; emphasizes word comprehension skills including context clues, dictionary use, and word components as well as paragraph comprehension skills including locating and inferring information.
RDG-093	Introduction to College Reading	Provides directed practice in development of college reading skills, emphasizing vocabulary skills, comprehension skills, advanced reading skills, and reading for study. Vocabulary skills include dictionary use, word components and etymology, context clues, and multiple meanings of words. Comprehension skills include main ideas and support words signaling key concepts. Advanced reading skills include critical reading and reading efficiency. Reading for study includes effective textbook study methods, outlining, study mapping, summarizing, and textbook graphics.
RDG-104	Reading For Non-Native Speakers	Directed practice in college reading skills emphasizing vocabulary, comprehension, critical thinking, reading efficiency and reading across the curriculum for non-native speaking students.&nbsp;
RDG-106	Advanced Reading for Non-Native Speakers	Directed practice in advanced college reading skills emphasizing discipline specific vocabulary, advanced comprehension, higher level critical thinking skills, improved reading efficiency and reading across the curriculum for second-language students.&nbsp;
RDG-111	Reading Across the Disciplines	Focus is on improving reading and thinking skills through skill instruction and extensive guided-practice with academic discipline-based readings.
RDG-199	Phonics and Fluency	Focus will be on improving pronunciation and fluency, especially when reading aloud. Activities include spelling and phonics instruction as well as speaking and reading exercises designed to increase reader's fluency and natural voice when reading. A grade of "C" or better is needed to move into the next ESL class, ESL 104. Emphasis will be on speaking although writing will be part of the class curriculum as well.
SOC-101	Introduction to Sociology	Examines relationship between individual and society in social structure of modern society. Introduction to way in which sociologists interpret and research human behavior. Covers patterns of social interaction and social influences on individual conduct.
SOC-102	Introduction to Sociological Theory	Examination of key figures in sociology. Introduction to history of sociology, sociologists, theoretical perspectives, and the classical and contemporary sociological theory and the application of theory to social groups, social interaction, and social institutions.
SOC-151	Gerontology I	Overview of normal effects of aging including physical, psychological, and social changes. Problems associated with aging, such as increased dependence, loss of health, financial constraints, loss of friends and spouse, and altered living arrangements. Content presented from perspective of aging person and society as a whole.
SOC-201	Contemporary Social Issues	Study of major social problems facing human groups in modern society such as deviance, inequality, war, and overpopulation. Emphasis placed on social problems that arise as result of institutional fluctuations in economy, family, government, religion, science, and technology.
SOC-210	Sociology of Health and Healthcare	Examination of the social, economic, cultural and individual factors in age related health issues. Topics include epidemiology, social structuring of age, healthcare services, policies and programs, as well as relationships between doctors and patients.
SOC-215	Marriage and the Family	Reviews historical development of the family and patterns of intimate relationships in modern society. Analysis of institution of family in terms of relationship to other institutions in society. Specific topics include love, dating, parenting, families in crisis, and alternative lifestyles.
SOC-221	Sociology of Art	Major trends in art examined in relationship to socio-historical developments. Art seen as both comment on and reflection of society. Team taught by sociology instructor and art instructor.
SOC-224	Sex, Gender, and Society	Focus on analysis of women and men in society and culture. Multiple disciplines examined as means to study social processes through which sex roles develop and are acquired. Examines individual and social consequences of sex differences and sex inequality.
SOC-241	Sociology Through Literature	Application of sociological concepts to literature to analyze literature as social commentary. Variety of literary selections used to analyze socio-historical events and movements.
SOC-251	Aspects of Aging	Focus on social variables and forces that affect the aging process. Topics include sociological theories of aging, technological and social change and effects on environment of older people, and prejudice and discrimination against elderly.
SOC-290	Readings in Sociology	Focus on specific social phenomenon. Topic varies depending on semester and instructor. Students encouraged to suggest topics of interest.
SPN-101	Spanish Language and Culture I	Beginning Spanish course that presents basic language skills of speaking, listening comprehension, reading and writing, with emphasis on effective linguistic functioning in real situations. Opportunity provided for audio-lingual practice outside of class.
SPN-102	Spanish Language and Culture II	Continuation of Spanish 101.
SPN-190	Topics in Spanish Language and Culture II	Exploration of special topics and/or activities in 100 level Spanish language and culture. Prerequisite and corequisite dependant on topic.
SPN-195	Spanish Language and Civilization Experiences	Involves travel and/or study within Hispanic or Latin American culture area. May have prerequisites and may be repeated for credit.
SPN-201	Spanish Language and Culture III	Follow up to SPN 102. Provides expanded opportunities for listening, speaking, reading, and writing. Opportunity provided for audio-lingual practice outside of class.
SPN-202	Spanish Conversation and Composition	Intensive one-semester course focusing on conversational skills, grammar review and composition. Exploration of role of Hispanic world.
SPN-215	Reading in Spanish	Reading and discussion of various short selections and at least one complete work in the original Spanish.
SPN-220	Latin American Culture and Civilization	Overview of history, geography, culture and social development of peoples of Latin America . Exercises and activities reinforce and develop Spanish language skills. (Taught in Spanish.)
SPN-230	Spanish Culture and Civilization	Overview of history, geography, culture, and social development of peoples of the Iberian Peninsula. Exercises and activities reinforce and develop Spanish language skills. (Taught in Spanish.)
SPN-290	Topics in Intermediate Spanish Language and Culture	Exploration of special topics in 200 level Spanish language and culture. Prerequisite and corequisite dependant on topic.
SPE-100	Pronunciation and Communication for Non-Native Speakers	For the non-native speaker of English, this course focuses on pronunciation improvement. By learning the American style of intonation, rhythm, speech production,and syllable stress, speech will be more understandable, articulate and expressive. Small group and individual communication activities, both speaking and listening, will reinforce these skills. This course is open to non-native speakers of English who are at an intermediate level or above.&nbsp; Students must take the Compass ESL test.
SPE-101	Oral Communication	Focus on importance of communication competence in a variety of situations. Topics include verbal and nonverbal communication, listening, perception, self-concept, small group communication, and public speaking. Students required to prepare and present three to four graded oral presentations.
SPE-102	Public Speaking	In-depth look at art of public speaking. Expands knowledge of ideas and concepts presented in SPE 101. Focus on presenting additional types of speeches, including business and organizational, ceremonial, speeches of tribute, acceptance, and toasting.
SPE-103	Persuasion	Skills necessary to become informed and critical consumer of persuasive messages. Persuasion examined through popular culture, advertising, politics, and mass media. Insights given into language use and symbols, nonverbal communication, and cultural and psychological approaches to persuasion.
SPE-104	Small Group Communication	Study of process of group communication. Focus on group development, group roles, decision-making, leadership, power, and conflict management. How to be more productive member of group by acquiring skills to enhance group interaction.
SPE-105	Interviewing	Focuses on art of interviewing in variety of contexts. Topics include types and uses of questions, common question pitfalls, listening, verbal and nonverbal communication, and specialized types of interviews such as journalistic, survey, persuasive, employment, performance review, counseling, and health care.
SPE-110	Interpersonal Communication	How to become more informed and skillful communicators in diverse social world and more aware of how and why misunderstandings arise in communication among people whose dissimilar backgrounds and identities lead them to have different views about what communication means and does. Topics include dealing with difficult people, expression of emotions, assertiveness training, and conflict management.
SPE-115	Voice and Diction	Study of the development and understanding of respiration, phonation, resonation, articulation, and diction. Credit not available for both SPE 115 and THE 115.
SPE-200	Argumentation and Debate	The discovery, support, and critical evaluation of intelligent arguments and decisions. Studies argument, evidence, reasoning, and oral advocacy; includes investigation, research, and critical analysis of claims and establishment of truth through proof.
SPE-201	Leadership Theory and Development	Leadership, the ability to influence other's behaviors and thoughts to accomplish a goal, is a responsibility faced in a variety of personal and professional contexts. Learn what it means to be a leader, how different leadership styles are utilized and how cultural, ethical and moral pressures affect leadership. Students will identify areas for personal growth and improvement in leadership positions as they learn and develop their own leadership skills, values, ethics and morals. Examination of leadership theory and development will be from a variety of backgrounds.
SPE-205	Gender Communication	Answers to questions that confound women's and men's attempts to communicate with each other. Topics include gender construction through one's culture, portrayal of men and women in media, male and female approaches to conversation, role of power and empowerment in marriage and families, gender relations in workplace, and men and women in education.
SPE-210	Oral Interpretation	Basic study of the principles of oral interpretation and their application performance. Credit not available for both SPE 210 and THE 210.
SPE-215	Intercultural Communication	Explores issues related to intercultural communication process. Considers important role of context (social, cultural, and historical) in intercultural interactions. Topics include stereotyping, prejudice, ethnocentrism, social class and religious identities, folk culture, power, and intercultural conflict.
SPE-225	Professional Communication	Role of and development of professional communication skills intrinsic to the workplace.&nbsp; Focus is on the development of theoretical and performance competencies in interpersonal communication, small group communication, organizational communication and public communication.&nbsp; Includes understanding organizational diversity and ethics; improving listening skills; enhancing interviewing skills; managing group meetings and teamwork; and presentation of informational and persuasive proposals via enhancement of verbal, vocal and visual strategies.
THE-115	Voice and Diction	Study of the development and understanding of respiration, phonation, resonation, articulation, and diction. Credit not available for both SPE 115 and THE 115.
THE-122	Introduction to Theater	Emphasizes appreciation of theater as one of living arts. Surveys theater history and dramatic theory from Greeks to present Broadway. Includes lectures, films and discussions on the practitioners and work. Requires attendance at live theater productions.
THE-123	Introduction to Cinema	Introduction to history, theory and criticism of film. Explores American and European film traditions. Major genres, authors and artists, and directing and production styles. Viewing of numerous films representative of various genres and directing styles.
THE-124	History of Film	History of cinema from late 19th century beginnings to present. Attention given its technological, economic and artistic issues. Classic films of various directors and countries. Weekly viewings required.
THE-126	Major Themes in Film	Focus on film theme. Among possibilities 1) genre films such as gangster film, western film and musical, 2) socially significant topics such as women and minorities in film, or 3) major styles or movements in film such as Film Noir or French New Wave. Topics change annually. Viewing time required
THE-128	Acting I	Introduction to developing oral and physical communication through exercises, improvisation and scene work. Theories of acting introduced. Attendance at live theater productions required.
THE-140	Stagecraft	Introduction to basic fundamentals of stagecraft in scenery, lighting, costumes, and other areas of technical theater. Emphasis on practical application, with expectation to participate in technical production of college plays.
THE-143	Tap Dance I	A beginning dance course that covers the basic tap dance techniques. &nbsp;Tap dance step combinations are used to develop an understanding of coordination, rhythmic variations and performance skills. &nbsp;Tap shoes are required.
THE-144	Modern Dance I	A basic movement course emphasizing beginning and essential elements of dance. &nbsp;Course explores specific technique and terminology. &nbsp;Emphasis is placed on expression and creativity through dance movement.
THE-145	Jazz Dance I	Using the basic elements of jazz dance, movements designed to increase range of motion, strength, endurance, agility, coordination, stability, line and spacial awareness will be emphasized. &nbsp;The dance elements of time, force, space, dynamics, expression and more will be incorporated.
THE-210	Oral Interpretation	Basic study of the principles of oral interpretation and their application performance. Credit not available for both SPE 210 and THE 210.
THE-228	Acting II	Continuation of introduction to acting class. More advanced scene work and polishing of audition techniques. Attendance at live theater production required.
THE-229	History of American Musical Theater I	Study of American musical theater from its origins through Rodgers &amp; Hammerstein. Students taking this course may not receive credit for MUS 113.
THE-230	History of American Musical Theater II	Study of American musical theater from Rodgers and Hammerstein to the present.
THE-240	Introduction to Theater Design	Introduction to theater design in areas of scenery, lighting, and costume design. Exploration of fundamentals of design conception and communication through analysis, research, writing and project work.
THE-259	Music Theater Workshop I	Performance-oriented workshop experience that studies acting styles as applied to a song. Covers various styles and periods of musical theater.
THE-260	Music Theater Workshop	Performance-oriented workshop experience that studies acting styles as applied to a song. Covers various styles and periods of musical theater.
THE-261	Introduction to Theater Management	Examines the principles of theater and other performing arts management as it relates to profit and non-profit entities. Emphasis will be placed on the practical and contemporary aspects of the field, including facility management, budgeting, programming, audience development, fundraising, marketing, staffing and leadership.
THE-270	Acting Practicum	Theories and techniques of acting and stagecraft applied in college productions.
THE-271	Stagecraft Practicum I	Practical application of technical theater to college productions.
THE-299	Topics in Theater	This course will be offered on an as needed basis to accommodate special projects.
WLD-101	Introduction to Welding	This covers basic work, health and safety information involved in the profession of welding, including the interpretation of welding symbols and sketches or drawings, and fabricating parts from sketches or drawings.
WLD-111	Thermal Cutting	In this course students will learn to set up and perform straight square edge, shape square edge and straight bevel edge manual oxyfuel gas cuts (OFC) and plasma arc cuts (PAC) on various metals, perform OFC scarfing and gouging operations on carbon steel, and inspect and repair equipment used in cutting operations.
WLD-121	Shielded Metal Arc Welding I	In this course students will learn the basic skills and knowledge needed to set up Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) equipment, choose appropriate electrodes, and perform SMAW operations on carbon steel.
WLD-122	Shielded Metal Arc Welding II	This course expands on the techniques learned in WLD 121. Advanced welding techniques in Shielded Metal Arc Welding (SMAW) required of AWS Advanced level welders will be covered.
WLD-125	Welding Inspection and Testing	This welding class covers weld inspections and weld testing practices for the new welder; including how to examine cut surfaces and edges of prepared base metal parts; how to examine tack, root passes, intermediate layers, and completed welds.
WLD-131	Gas Metal Arc Welding I	In this course students will learn the basic skills and knowledge needed to set up Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) equipment, choose appropriate electrodes, and perform GMAW-S and GMAW (spray) operations on carbon steel.
WLD-132	Gas Metal Arc Welding II	This course expands on the techniques learned in WLD 131. Advanced welding techniques in Gas Metal Arc Welding (GMAW) required of AWS Advanced level welders will be covered.
WLD-141	Flux Cored Arc Welding I	In this course students will learn the basic skills and knowledge needed to set up Flux Cored Arc Welding (FCAW) equipment, choose appropriate electrodes, and perform FCAW-G/GM and FCAW-S operations on carbon fuel.
WLD-142	Flux Cored Arc Welding II	This course expands on the techniques learned in WLD 141. Advanced welding techniques in Flux Cored Arc Welding (FCAW) required of AWS Advanced level welders will be covered.
WLD-151	Gas Tungsten Arc Welding I	In this course students will learn the basic skills and knowledge needed to set up Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) equipment, choose appropriate electrodes and perform GTAW operations on carbon steel, austenitic stainless steel, and aluminum.
WLD-152	Gas Tungsten Arc Welding II	This course expands on the techniques learned in WLD 151. Advanced welding techniques in Gas Tungsten Arc Welding (GTAW) required of AWS Advanced level welders will be covered.
