ACC-100	Applied Accounting	An introductory course in the principles of accounting with emphasis on practice in bookkeeping techniques, designed to familiarize career students with the basic accounting system and the knowledge of keeping records.
ACC-110	Financial Accounting I	The emphasis of this course is on the measurement and presentation of financial data. The course focuses on preparation and use of corporate financial statements consistent with General Accepted Accounting Principles.
ACC-114	Managerial Accounting	Emphasis is on evaluation and utilization of accounting data for the purpose of planning and controlling operations. Topics include financial statement analysis, methods of cost accumulation, budgeting, standard costs, direct costing, and cost-volume-profit analysis.
ACC-120	Computer Accounting Applications for Business	This survey course introduces various commercial accounting software in a hands-on environment. Topics covered include general ledger, receivables, payables, inventory, payroll, and importing and exporting accounting data to other software. The course provides an introduction to accounting applications of spreadsheet and presentation software and the Internet. No previous computer experience is necessary.
ACC-122	Computer Accounting Applications - Spreadsheets	This course covers accounting applications using spreadsheet software as a tool in solving accounting problems and presenting and analyzing accounting data. Topics include using spreadsheet software to prepare accounting reports such as the income statement, balance sheet, statement of cash flow, and special purpose accounting reports for decision making. Financial reports are analyzed using spreadsheet software. In addition, auditing a worksheet and graphical analysis of accounting information is performed using the charting feature of spreadsheet software.
ACC-124	Computer Accounting Applications - Databases	This course covers how to build a database for accounts receivable, accounts payable, inventory, fixed assets and payroll.
ACC-203	Cost Accounting	This course covers modern cost/managerial theory and practices with an emphasis on using cost information for managerial decision making.
ACC-204	Income Tax Accounting	A study of federal tax accounting; emphasis is placed on the procedure required to comply with the tax laws and to make the required tax returns.  Income tax, social security and payroll tax accounting is included.
ACC-206	Auditing	This course teaches the procedures of examination of financial statements by external and internal auditors. Topics include  auditing standards, development of working papers and reports, and development of sampling and original records examination.
ACC-208	Intermediate Accounting I	This course covers financial accounting theory relating to asset, liability and owner's equity accounts, including methods of valuation and the related effects on financial statements.
ACC-209	Intermediate Accounting II	A further study of financial accounting theory.  Topics will include intangible assets, current and long-term liabilities, equity, earnings per share, and investments.
ACC-211	Current Topics in Accounting	Study of selected topics or current topics in Accounting. This course will provide an opportunity to explore various current issues in greater detail.
ACC-212	Nonprofit Accounting	The course addresses the principles, concepts and processes involved in the accounting treatment for nonprofit entities. Organizations discussed will include state and local governments, the federal government, college and universities, hospitals and health organizations, and other voluntary health and welfare organizations.
ACC-213	Survey of Business Taxes	This is a survey course of Business Taxes. Topics include federal taxation of income, state taxation of income, state capital base taxes, state sales and use tax, federal and state employment related taxes and property taxes.
ACC-214	Business Taxes: Research and Planning	This course concentrates on advanced business tax issues for partnerships, corporations, and S-corporations. Topics include tax planning, tax practice considerations, and tax research.
ACC-215	Fraud and Forensic Accounting	This course introduces students to current methodologies and work performed by forensic accountants. The concentration of this course focuses on current fraud issues. In addition, this course will educate students about the causes of fraud and explore the methods of detection, investigation and prevention.
ACC-291	Accounting Internship	An Accounting Internship allows students to apply skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career opportunities while supervised by an employer and a faculty member. Working as an intern for 120 hours under the supervision of an accounting professional, the student will have the opportunity to participate in the accounting functions of an accounting firm, accounting department, or other business unit.
ACC-292	Accounting Internship II	This is an additional internship opportunity for accounting students to apply skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career opportunities while supervised by an employer and a faculty member. Working as an intern for 120 hours under the supervision of an accounting professional, the student will have the opportunity to participate in the accounting functions of an accounting firm, accounting department, or other business unit.
ACC-293	Accounting Internship III	This is an additional internship opportunity for accounting students to apply skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career opportunities while supervised by an employer and a faculty member. Working as an intern for 120 hours under the supervision of an accounting professional, the student will have the opportunity to participate in the accounting functions of an accounting firm, accounting department, or other business unit.
ANT-101	Introduction to Physical Anthropology and Archaeology	This course is designed to present the principles, theories, data and methods used by anthropologists and archaeologists in their attempts to study human evolutionary development. Generally speaking, three broad topics are covered  the mechanisms of evolution, human prehistory, and the fossil evidence of Homo Sapiens and ancestral forms.
ANT-102	Introduction to Cultural Anthropology	In this course, students are introduced to the great diversity of human cultures. Economic, social, political and religious systems are compared, including such topics as the nature of culture, cultural ecology, magic and witchcraft, disease and curing, sex roles, and rites of passage. Problems resulting when traditional societies confront industrial societies or industrialization are discussed.
ANT-103	Cultural Variations	This course focuses on culture as a prime determinant of human behavior. To understand how culture "works" helps us to understand better the people who live in that culture. The basic concepts of culture are presented including adaptation to the environment, language and communication, social stratification, values and attitudes, customs and habits, and social change. Economics, politics, religion and social systems are compared and evaluated with special application to living, visiting, and doing business in another culture.
ANT-202	Ethnography: North American Indians	This course presents an introduction to the beliefs, customs and social organization of the Indians of North America. The course will deal with the Indians as they were before Columbus, their life ways, world views, and religion, economic patterns and technology, patterns of family life, warfare and confrontations with Europeans.
ARA-101	Modern Arabic I	This is a practical, beginning course in speaking and understanding modern Arabic. It is designed for persons who want to learn some Arabic, who want to travel to an Arabic-speaking country, or who have previous limited experience in Arabic. Attention is given to proper pronunciation, to practicing the words and basic structures most frequently in daily conversation and to learning the social conventions and Arabic culture necessary for interpersonal communication with native speakers of contemporary Arabic.
ARA-102	Modern Arabic II	Modern Arabic II is a continuation of Modern Arabic I. Students complete the basic elements of Arabic grammar, increase their vocabulary and gain added facility in speaking and reading Arabic.
ARC-102	Introduction to Sustainable Environments	This is a foundation course in which a broad spectrum of issues in sustainable environments are discussed. Environmental and economic issues including stewardship, healthy environments, building culture, community development, and high performing building technologies will be explored.
ARC-110	Architectural Graphics	Foundation course in which quality drafting in the areas of line weight and quality, lettering, dimensioning, notes is taught. Drafting procedures such as orthographics, axonometrics, perspective, shade and shadow, topography, entourage rendering are introduced. Care and use of drafting and print tools and media are considered. (Approximate cost of supply kit - $50). Additional lab hours required.
ARC-112	Architectural Design and Production I	A small project is designed and detailed. Topics covered include  design method, design presentation techniques, construction details, and construction document set production. Verbal and graphic communication of ideas is developed. A portfolio of student work is begun. Additional lab hours required.
ARC-114	Architectural History and Theory	Course presents a survey of the history of shelter, monuments, other building types, towns and cities, and site design in relation to current architectural trends. Forces which shape the built-environment are studied. Tours of area sites or buildings may be included.
ARC-119	Sustainable Design Certification Systems and LEED GA Preparation	This course surveys multiple sustainable design certification systems of both buildings and products, and provides preparation for the LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Green Associate Examination. Core concepts and performance criteria across building types, product requirements, and rating systems will be stressed.
ARC-123	Introduction to Computer-Aided Architectural Drafting	Students learn to operate hardware and software generally in use in the architectural profession. A basic introduction to the systems will be presented. Hands-on use of the equipment will be emphasized.
ARC-124	Introduction to Building Information Modeling	This is a hands-on introduction to the use of building information modeling (BIM) software for architecture. Instruction will focus on how both graphic and non-graphic architectural information for a building is produced through the creation of a single project database represented in a 3D model.
ARC-125	Sustainable Materials and Technologies in the Built Environment	This foundational course examines the process for producing high performing, sustainable built environments. The student will learn how to research, evaluate, select, and specify appropriate materials and systems at all scales within the built environment. Code and Certification process criteria will be discussed as it relates to environmental performance.
ARC-126	Architectural History I	This course is a survey of the influences and development of architecture from pre-history to the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. The language of architecture, aesthetics and structure are presented. Methodologies and the architectural styles of different periods and cultures are examined within the context of social, political and technological forces.
ARC-127	Architectural History II	This course presents a survey of modern architecture from the beginning of the Industrial Revolution to the present. The language of architecture, aesthetics and structure are presented. Methodologies and the architectural styles of different periods and cultures are examined within the context of social, political and technological forces.
ARC-209	Mechanical and Electrical Systems I	An introduction to the physics and practical design aspects of plumbing systems, and the systems and building form and fabric affecting the heat loss and gain and internal comfort of buildings.
ARC-211	Architectural Design and Production II	A small commercial project is designed and detailed. Topics covered include design method, design presentation techniques, construction details and construction document production. Verbal and graphic communication of ideas is continued. Students continue to develop a portfolio. Additional lab hours required.
ARC-219	Professional Architectural Practice	This course explores issues related to the functions of the architectural office   business practices and development, professional conduct and liability, project management, contract management, and marketing.
ARC-220	Architectural Design and Production III	Students will work on commercial/institutional projects designed to reinforce skills in building design, architectural rendering, and construction document production. A professional portfolio is completed during this course. Additional lab hours required.
ARC-222	Site Planning and Landscape Drafting	This course provides an introduction to the art of arranging the external environment to support human behavior. The student will learn skills used in architecture, engineering, landscape architecture and city planning. Principles of plane surveying as related to site planning are also studied. Drafting skills are studied with emphasis on site plans and techniques of landscape drafting. Additional hours required.
ARC-229	Architectural Specifications, Materials, and Methods	This course explores the process of selecting building materials, and introduces the Project Manual as an essential element of the Contract Documents. The student will learn how to research, evaluate, select and specify appropriate products for a variety of architectural projects.
ARC-231	Applications in Integrated Sustainable Design	This course is an advanced studio class where architectural technology, interior design and horticulture students collaboratively investigate environmentally conscious solutions to design problems. Charettes will be used to generate holistic sustainable strategies leading to the integrated design of the site, the building envelope and systems, and the interior environment. Additional studio hours required.
ART-100	Art Appreciation	This course is intended to stimulate student's visual, aesthetic and intellectual awareness of our global artistic heritage. Both historic and thematic approaches to a wide variety of objects and media will develop students' abilities to evaluate and discuss the arts. It is intended for non-art majors.
ART-101	Art History I	This course is a survey of art before 1300 C.E. Works of art and characteristics of artistic styles are presented and discussed as manifestations of influential ideas from the following cultures or periods  Prehistoric, Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Aegean, Greek, Etruscan, Roman, Early Christian, Byzantine, Early and Late Medieval, and two or more Non-Western Cultures.
ART-102	Art History II	This course is a survey of art after 1300 C.E. Works of art and characteristics of artistic styles are presented and discussed as manifestations of influential ideas from the following periods or styles  Proto-Renaissance, Early Italian Renaissance, Early and Late Northern Renaissance, High Renaissance, Mannerism, Baroque, Rococo, selected 19th and 20th Century styles, and two or more on-Western cultures.
ART-103	History of Modern Art	This course surveys modern art beginning with the late 18th century and proceeding through the work of contemporary artists. Recurrent themes from the following periods will be examined  Impressionism, Cubism, Surrealism, Abstract Expressionism, and other modern and contemporary styles.
ART-107	Design I	Emphasis on principles and elements of design through a series of assigned problems. Additional studio hours required.
ART-108	Design II	The study of color, exploring various color theories and the historical application through a series of problems. Additional studio hours required.
ART-109	Drawing I	This is a beginning course in fundamentals of drawing that includes an introduction to drawing principles, construction, proportion, form, value, perspective, composition, tools and media. Perception, visual awareness, sensitivity, attitude and judgment are all stressed. Additional studio hours required.
ART-110	Drawing II	A continuation of ART 109, the fundamentals and principles of drawing, with more emphasis on organizational concepts and a variety of media. Additional studio hours required.
ART-111	Figure Drawing I	Introduction to drawing from the human figure, analysis of structure, proportion and basic forms. Additional studio hours required.
ART-112	Figure Drawing II	Continuation of ART 111. Emphasizes the use of various drawing media. Analysis of the structure of the human figure through anatomy. Additional studio hours required.
ART-113	Ceramics I	A study of the basic principles of ceramics and ceramic sculpture with emphasis on hand-built techniques. As the student progresses, there will be study on the kick wheel. Additional studio hours required.
ART-114	Painting I	An introduction to oil painting from still-life objects, with emphasis on technique and the effective use of color. Composition and drawing will be stressed as they relate to painting. Additional studio hours required.
ART-115	Printmaking I	This is an introductory course in traditional and contemporary printmaking. The student will be exposed to a variety of printmaking media from a selection of monotypes, linoleum blocks, wood blocks, collagraphs, dry points, etchings, and solvent transfers. Additional studio hours required.
ART-116	Sculpture I	A course based on individual development stressing the elements of sculpture  form, space, light, movement, texture, proportion in relation to the basic methods associated with the sculpture field. Additional studio hours required.
ART-125	Interactive Design I	This course introduces students to the methods and practices of creating graphics for use in interactive digital media. Students will create graphics used in video, mobile devices, web, social media sites and other formats of digital communication. Software used will include Photoshop, Illustrator, After Effects, iMovie, Second Life and others. Additional lab hours required.
ART-128	Survey of African American Art	This course covers major Black artists from colonial to contemporary greats. These artists and their work are presented and discussed in context with the art movement prevalent at the time. Museum and gallery visits will give students the opportunity to see actual works. The course is designed to inspire artists and educate non-artists to appreciate and understand these important artists and their work.
ART-131	Computer Art Studio	Computer Art Studio introduces students to the most common graphic software programs. Students will learn to navigate through the operating system and will gain basic experience with drawing, photo-imaging and page-layout applications. This course concentrates on how to use various graphic software programs, techniques, and tools. Additional lab hours required.
ART-133	Graphic Design I	This course is an introduction to graphic communications with an emphasis on the elements and principles of graphic design. It will cover basic layout processes, typography, concept generation, and the use of tools and materials required in the field. Art, design, and advertising history in a graphic design context will be covered.
ART-134	Graphic Design II	Students in this course will further explore the area of graphic design with an emphasis on various layout formats, the creative use of typography, color systems and theory, and the historic aspects of graphic design. Concept origination and development are also addressed. The use of computers and software design tools will be employed. Additional studio hours required.
ART-135	Graphic Production	Students will study the history of printing and the basics of the different commercial printing processes available today. The major emphasis will be on proper preparation of electronic pre-press files for spot-color, multi-color and process-color print production, the selection of printing papers, and communicating with printing suppliers. Design printing challenges, multiple page document preparation, and preparing files for electronic publication will also be covered. Additional studio hours required.
ART-138	Drawing for Graphics	This course emphasizes the process of drawing as it relates to graphic design. Original drawings are created to convey design concepts using models, photographs, and other reference material.  Additional studio hours required.
ART-150	Design Communication for Interior Design and Architecture I	This course provides an introduction to graphic communication techniques as a way to communicate architecture and interior design processes and solutions. Students will gain experience in perspective drawing, rendering, sketching, layout and composition utilizing traditional and digital methods. Additional studio hours required.
ART-151	Interior Design I	An introduction to interior space planning through the use of scaled floor plans and elevations. Emphasis is placed on the design and selection of furnishings, textiles, accessories, and other interior components. Additional studio hours required.
ART-152	Textiles	A study of fabric selection, care and performance based on the characteristics of textile fibers, processing, color application, and finishes.
ART-153	History of Cultural Environments I	The history of furniture styles, decorative arts, and architecture from Mesopotamia to French Empire will be taught. The emphasis is on materials, techniques, and aesthetics that make environments unique within their historical cultural environments.
ART-154	Computer Aided Interior Design	This course is an introduction to hardware and software used in the practice of interior design. AutoCAD will be used to create scaled drawings, specifications and programming documents. Additional lab hours required.
ART-155	Bath Design	This course explores how to apply design principles and presentation standards in the planning and designing of safe and functional bathrooms. This course meets the standards established by the National Kitchen and Bath Association.
ART-156	Advanced Kitchen Design	This course applies design principles and presentation standards in the planning and designing of efficient kitchen layouts. Following National Kitchen and Bath Association (NKBA) guidelines, students obtain experience studying proper cabinet, appliance, and fixture selection.
ART-158	Workplace Learning: Kitchen and Bath Design	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in functions of the kitchen and bath industry in order to enhance their preparation for entering the kitchen and bath design field. Minimum of 160 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
ART-165	Photography I	This course provides an introduction to the settings and creative controls of the camera, as well as the craft of black and white printing. Students will learn traditional darkroom techniques, as well as methods for approaching a variety of subjects and improving photographic compositions. Additional studio hours required.
ART-166	Photography II	A more concentrated study of photographic methods, printing techniques, and portfolio development is pursued in this course. Aesthetic issues, as well as more enhanced imaging and darkroom options, are also explored. Additional studio hours required.
ART-167	Color Photography	This course explores the materials of color imaging, color theories, and the techniques associated with color printing. Sets of color images that display a variety of technical and aesthetic issues will be produced by the student.  Additional lab hours required.
ART-168	History of Photography	This course explores the understanding of photography as a cultural, commercial and aesthetic endeavor. Significant historical events, techniques, equipment, aesthetic trends and individual contributions that have influenced this art form throughout the world are discussed and analyzed.
ART-169	Visual Language	This course critiques the roles, uses and messages of photographs and other visual images. By exploring the ways in which we gather and interpret information from a variety of sources to form mental constructs, this course is valuable to anyone with a desire to further their skills in critical perception. Students will examine artistic and journalistic photographs, advertising, film, television, and other media images as forces affecting twentieth and twenty-first century thought.
ART-172	Digital Photography	Students will be introduced to the medium of digital photography. They will learn digital camera basics, including the mechanics of the camera and printing with the computer. Students will follow guided exercises and projects and produce portfolios of prints using digital printers. Additional lab hours required.
ART-186	Building Systems and Construction for Interior Designers	This course explores building construction, systems and technology and their relationship to design development and project completion.
ART-204	Photography III	This course is a continuation of the exploration of the photographic process and techniques begun in Photography I and Photography II, with a greater emphasis being placed on the creative process and the individual's perception and understanding of the elusive nature of images. Additional studio hours required.
ART-207	Design III	An introduction to 3-D work, exploring the spatial qualities of mass, shape, volume.  Additional studio hours required.
ART-208	Design IV	Advanced problems in various aspects of design. Additional studio hours required.
ART-209	Drawing III	Emphasis is placed on methods of achieving compositional unity in drawing.  Balance, variety, rhythm, and repetition, some of the factors responsible for unified structure in drawing, will be examined on an advanced level. Additional studio hours required.
ART-210	Advanced Drawing	Research in drawing problems that will deal primarily with concept, media, style and composition. The human figure, still-life objects and surroundings will be used as topical sources.
ART-211	Figure Drawing III	Advanced figure drawing from the model. Additional studio hours required.
ART-213	Ceramics II	A study of the techniques of wheel-thrown ceramics and extensive experimentation with glazes and oxides. Additional studio hours required.
ART-214	Painting II	A continuation of ART 114 with emphasis on composition and color. Knowledge will be developed for future individual study. Additional studio hours required.
ART-215	Printmaking II	A continuation of ART 115. In addition to continued exploration of media covered in Printmaking I, this course introduces students to additional printmaking techniques, from a selection of lithography, silk screen, photo-mechanical methods, chine chine collé and mixed media. Additional studio hours required.
ART-216	Sculpture II	A continuation of the study of the elements of sculpture, stressing the more creative approach in terms of new methods and materials. Emphasis will be on the human and natural forms as a basis for academic and subjective analysis. Additional studio hours required.
ART-221	Page Layout: Quark/InDesign	This course is designed to provide students with an advanced exploration and understanding of the QuarkXPress and Adobe InDesign digital page design and layout software programs. Principles of page layout design and the graphic synthesis of typographic elements will be studied with these programs on an advanced level. Additional lab hours required.
ART-224	Package Design	This course explores the concepts, techniques and concerns of graphic design as applied to package design and presentation display. Issues covered include the creation of effective package design, special production processes and the creation of three-dimensional package mock-ups utilizing both traditional methods and the computer. Additional studio hours required.
ART-228	Workplace Learning: Photography	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the business to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum of 150 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
ART-233	Graphic Design III	This class will continue to examine the subject of graphic design with the emphasis on finding creative solutions to complex visual communication problems. A professional approach to the discipline will be stressed with client briefs, simulated client meetings, and critiques. Additional studio hours required.
ART-234	Graphic Design IV	This course is an advanced exploration of graphic design, with the emphasis upon creative problem solving and the use of professional practices. Students will learn to solve complex visual communication problems such as branding, three-dimensional design, complex two-dimensional design, and design for electronic media. Additional studio hours required.
ART-235	Graphic Production II	This course is a continuation of Graphic Production I but with a greater emphasis on the proper preparation of electronic pre-press files for spot-color, multi-color and process-color print production. Students will execute print projects using the computer to create pre-press files for print production. They will also examine many advanced printing techniques, multiple page document preparation and the proper methods for sending files to printers. Additional studio hours required.
ART-236	Typography	This course will stress the refined use of typography as a design and communication tool. Students will study the history and classifications of letterforms and employ this knowledge base in the creation of various typographical designs and presentations. Typical projects may range from letter and alphabet design to the use of typographical forms as the feature design elements in graphic designs or page layouts. Additional studio hours required.
ART-238	Drawing for Graphics II	Students will build upon the principles covered in Drawing for Graphics I as they learn about additional techniques and materials necessary to explore drawing solutions to graphic design problems typically encountered in this field. Additional studio hours required.
ART-239	Illustration I	This course explores methods and theories of illustrative drawing and painting as it is used in support of graphic communication. A special emphasis will be placed on its application to advertising and publication design. Additional studio hours required.
ART-240	Illustration II	This course exposes students to an advanced approach to illustrate drawing and painting. Student will create illustrations using both traditional and digital methods. Additional lab hours required.
ART-241	Publication Design	This course will introduce the student to the development of page design and layout as it applies to graphic communications. Emphasis will be placed on the creative composition of publications including newsletters, brochures, and interactive documents, etc. General principles of page layout design will be studied including the placement of text, illustrations/photographs and logotypes and the important synthesis of typographic elements. Additional lab hours required.
ART-245	Portfolio Design and Professional Practices	This course is the culmination of all the student has learned and produce in their graphic communications course of study. Students will be guided in the preparation of a print and digital portfolio of their work, in the development of a resume and related self-promotion documents, and will learn practical interviewing techniques. The intent will be to prepare students to enter the graphic communications fields and/or transfer to an accredited four-year university or art institute. Additional lab hours required.
ART-249	Digital Photography II	This course explores advanced techniques and aesthetics associated with digital photography. Students will expand their knowledge and use of camera controls, editing software and workflow solutions while building a successful portfolio of images. Additional studio hours required.
ART-251	Interior Design II	This course focuses on creating functional and aesthetically pleasing commercial and residential interiors using a systematic approach to the design process. Special emphasis is placed on commercial and residential planning guidelines and the impact of building and life safety codes on interior environments. Additional studio hours required.
ART-252	Interior Design III	This course is an in-depth study of interior design emphasizing the influence of abstract design, universal design, global design, and sustainable practices on the built environment. A systematic approach to design processes will be used to develop projects that apply knowledge of space planning, principles and elements of design, color theory, and visual art skills in two dimensional and three dimensional design. Additional studio hours required.
ART-253	Interior Design IV	This course is an advanced study and application of the problem solving approach to design of the built environment. This course will also introduce students to the ethical standards and business procedures of the interior design industry. Additional studio hours required.
ART-254	History of Cultural Environments II	This course is a continuation of the history of furniture, decorative arts, and architectural elements from Tudor England to current times. The emphasis is on materials, techniques, and aesthetics that make environments unique within their historical cultural environments.
ART-265	Artificial Light Photography	An introduction to basic theories of illumination, as applied to various subject compositions is a primary component of this course. The utilization of a variety of light sources within this context will also be studied, along with their proper use with SLR and medium-format cameras. The production of professional quality prints will be undertaken.
ART-266	Black and White Printing Lab	A guided study of black and white printing techniques geared to individual student needs and interests. Competence and excellence in traditional techniques of "straight" photography are stressed, with study undertaken in image refinement and contemporary printing alternatives. This course is geared towards individuals who have a basic knowledge of darkroom processes and would like further direction. Additional studio hours required.
ART-267	Contemporary Concepts in Photography	This class focuses on current issues and ideas about photography. Students will  practice the most recent trends through assignments, augmented by lectures,  demonstrations and visits to galleries. Reading, writing and discussion of latest concepts will be central to the course. Additional studio hours may be required.
ART-269	Field Photography	The emphasis of this course is on photographing subject matter found in nature. Trips to areas of photographic interest will provide students the opportunity to explore and visually portray elements within natural environments. Attention is especially given to methods for adapting to and photographing successfully in new situations.
ART-270	Fashion Photography	This course addresses the approaches and concepts associated with this professional field. Methods for lighting and posing models in the studio and in outdoor locations will be stressed. Post-production techniques and the critical evaluation of photographs will encourage the development of a portfolio based on professional standards. Additional studio hours required.
ART-271	Portrait Photography	Photographic techniques to create effective portraits of people will be studied, using both natural and artificial illumination. Close-ups, environmental portraits, and photographing groups will be covered. Work will also include the creation of quality prints and the building of a successful portfolio for presentation. Additional studio hours required.
ART-272	Documentary Photography	This course studies the use of photography in exploring social or cultural issues. The methods of approach used by documentary photographers will be discussed and practiced, with students considering the possible impact of images on society. Students will use cameras to study subjects in their own environments and will consider various contexts for the presentation of photographs. Additional studio hours required.
ART-273	Architectural Photography	Methods for photographing the exteriors and interiors of structures and buildings  are studied in this course. The utilization of several camera formats, including the view camera and digital SLR, will be undertaken. The control of perspective with the camera and current software, along with the balance of lighting, will also be emphasized. Work will include the making of fine quality prints and appropriate image presentation. Additional studio hours required.
ART-275	Photo Imaging I: Photoshop	This course is an investigation of processing of continuous tone image files.  Software tools and adjustment controls will be learned.  Students will investigate scanning, color and tonal management, image repair and compositing, and printing.  A portfolio of prints will be created emphasizing the individual expressiveness of the student. Additional lab hours required.
ART-280	Final Cut	Students will produce professional quality video content using Macintosh Final Cut non-linear editing software. Students will create digital video content and process project through the software. Clips will be edited; sound, transitions and titles will be added. Students will conceive, photograph, edit and complete a short movie. Additional lab hours required.
AT-100	Hardware Configuration and Troubleshooting: Macintosh/Windows	This course will address setting up the computer and connecting peripheral devices such as cameras, scanners and printers; partitioning the hard drive, adding RAM, installing software and virus protection, and troubleshooting simple problems.  Advanced topics include networking and using a server. Additional lab hours may be required.
AT-105	Digital Printing	This course is a survey of digital printing possibilities. Methodologies for converting electronic files to printed media are investigated. Varieties of printing technologies are evaluated for appearance, color fidelity, resolution, saturation and permanence. Where applicable to the process examined, variations in media (paper, canvas or films) will be tested. Additional lab hours required.
AT-106	Motion Media Design	This course provides instruction in the use of still imagery, typography, sound, special effects, video and other digital media to create animated, motion graphic sequences. Additional lab hours required.
AT-108	Computer Painting and Drawing: Corel Painter	Students will utilize a variety of computer drawing software programs to create life drawings utilizing digitizing tablets.  Assignments will include still life as well as the human figure.  The techniques of using the pressure sensitive drawing tablet will be investigated to allow the creation of expressive line, mass and shading. A portfolio of drawings in both color and monochrome will be submitted at the conclusion of the course. Additional lab hours required.
AT-120	Computer Drawing I:  Illustrator	This course is an investigation of vector imaging software used for the creation of drawings, typography and logotypes. Tools, palettes and menus will be learned, and methods of creating original expressive works will be developed. Students will investigate scanning reflective art, tracing, creating shapes, line control, color fills, and printing. Additional lab hours required.
AT-121	Watercolor I	A foundation course covering basic watercolor techniques and materials including washes, wet-into-wet, glazing, shading, color mixing and layering. Course will emphasize development of skills, diverse approaches and an individual style. Through the study of both contemporary and traditional watercolors, students will become familiar with the amazing potential of this medium. Class will paint a variety of subjects including still lifes and nature. Additional studio hours required.
AT-135	Web Design I	This course is an introduction to creating and building Web pages that effectively deliver art and information for business/organizational communications. Industry-standard software will be used and beginning HTML and CSS computer languages will be covered as well as design principles and how they relate to Web design. Additional lab hours required.
AT-143	Web Design II	This course continues the exploration of web site design and creation begun in Web Design I and introduces students to the methods and practices of creating graphics for use in interactive digital media. Students will also continue using standard web languages of HTML and CSS. Building and modifying content management systems (CMS) is a major focus of the class. Web sites are designed and built that utilize best practices for multiple-page site design and navigation, advanced layout solutions, and incorporating multimedia. Students will create projects to be used in video, on mobile devices, online, and for social media content as well as for interactive communication. Additional lab hours required.
AT-146	3D Modeling I: Surface Modeling	This course focuses on the development of three-dimensional models for use in multimedia, industrial design, and character development. Creation of 3D objects and spatial environments will be studied, in addition to photorealistic rendering, texture mapping and lighting techniques. Additional studio lab hours required.
AT-151	Interior Specifications, Materials, and Methods	This course is an in depth analysis of materials used in interior environments. Students will gain experience in the process of researching, evaluating, selecting, and specifying appropriate materials for interior environments. Special emphasis is placed on textiles and sustainable materials.
AT-152	Lighting Design	This is a lecture/studio course where students will learn methods of successful lighting design and applications of lighting details to working drawings for residential and commercial environments. Students will learn specifications and how to write a lighting schedule. Additional studio hours required.
AT-175	Video Art I	Students will explore video art as a personal expressive media for the individual artist, including work with specific software programs, sound equipment, and other tools used in the contemporary art world. Students will have the opportunity to investigate these technologies as they combine the various media to make artistic statements based on personal concerns and aesthetic decisions.
AT-176	Photography Workshop	Photography workshops will cover a variety of subjects in photography. Multiple sections on different topics may be offered during the same semester. Topics can include  bookmaking, hand coloring, emulsion lifts, medium format photography, night photography, etc.  Additional hours required.
AT-177	Jewelry and Metalsmithing	This course will introduce students to jewelry design and metalsmithing techniques. Students will be exposed to a variety of fabrication methods from a selection of cold-joining, soldering, sawing and piercing, metal forming, roll-printing, hammer and chasing, toll texturing, bezel stone-setting, pin backing systems, casting, and surface finishing. Additional lab hours required.
AT-195	Special Topics in Graphic Design	1-3	This course allows for the exploration of special topics as they emerge in the field of graphic design, maintaining a curriculum of problem solving and critical thinking. Additional hours required.
AT-201	Mixed Media	An introduction to mixed media (assemblage) art; the complementary component for design, drawing and figure drawing. An incorporation of all aspects of picture-making with an emphasis on experimentation, process and concepts with paint integration in the visual arts. Additional lab hours required.
AT-204	Comic Book Illustration I	This course emphasizes the basics of comic book illustration and techniques associated with this popular genre. Various materials and techniques will be explored to produce formatted comic strips. Additional lab hours required.
AT-205	Dimensional Illustration I	Students interested in Illustration will go beyond usual two-dimensional art methods to create dimensional art. Various material and techniques will be explored to introduce unique three-dimensional sculpture-based art methods to students. Additional studio hours required.
AT-206	3D Miniature Studio Set Design	Students interested in creating 3D Miniature Studio Sets will learn the basics of designing and constructing miniature sets for various entertainment venues and other related uses. The student will utilize skills learned in Drawing for Graphics and Illustration classes to execute imaginative sets. Additional studio hours required.
AT-207	Digital Illustration	This course is an exploration of the methods and theories of creating illustrations using the computer as the medium. A special emphasis will be placed on creative processes and using computer graphic software to produce illustrations. Additional lab hours required.
AT-208	Fantasy Illustration I	Students interested in Illustration will learn the basics and techniques used on books and gaming covers. The student will utilize skills learned in drawing for graphics and illustration to execute imaginative and creative illustrations. Additional lab hours required.
AT-210	Drawing Problems	This course focuses on drawing problems of an advanced nature. It will stress the continued development of individual ideas formulated in ART 210. Additional lab hours required.
AT-212	Special Topics in Photography	This course allows for advanced and specialized study within the medium of photography, concentrating on a specific set of materials or aesthetic issues, during the course of the term. A variety of topics, outside of the normal curriculum studies, can be offered on a rotating basis. Additional studio hours required.
AT-213	Advanced Ceramics	A self-directed learning experience for students. Course work may include throwing, glaze formulation, hand-building and kiln firing. Additional studio hours required.
AT-215	Advanced Printmaking	A continuation of ART 115 and ART 215. Students will pursue a more individual course of instruction and portfolio development in the printmaking media. The student will choose from media taught in ART 115 and ART 215 to develop a portfolio of professional prints. Additional studio hours required.
AT-219	Figure Sculpture	This course is an intensive exposure to creating figurative sculpture. Students will build basic armatures for both portraits and figures and work in clay from the model. Basic methods of plaster casting (waste molds) may be offered as an option at the end of the semester. Additional studio hours required.
AT-221	Watercolor II	An expansion and application of the basic watercolor techniques from the foundation course AT 121 through a series of paintings. Course will emphasize color theory, composition and development of an individual style along with study of master watercolorists both past and present. Students will paint a variety of subjects including still lifes, landscape and the human figure. Development of individual response and fluency of technique will be emphasized. Additional studio hours required.
AT-225	Watercolor III	An expansion of AT 221. The self-motivated student will work on advanced watercolor techniques in specific assignments and in self-directed paintings. Course will emphasize advanced color theory and development of content, subject matter, personal style and the ability to self-critique, with significant input from the instructor. Additional studio hours required.
AT-226	Watercolor IV	An expansion of AT 225. The advanced and self-motivated student will work on specific assignments and on self-directed paintings with significant input from the instructor. Emphasis will be on using the watercolor medium to create sophisticated compositions, a thematic body of work and a personal style. Additional studio hours required.
AT-227	3-D Studio	This course provides students with the opportunity to pursue extended study in 3-dimensional studio disciplines. Additional studio hours required.
AT-229	Advanced Painting Projects	This course will develop the painting and perceptual skills of students. The course is taught with an emphasis on individual study. Additional studio hours required.
AT-230	Figure Sculpture II	This course is a continuation of AT 219 and will more intensely explore methods for creating figurative sculpture. Students will continue to work from models, increasing their understanding of structural anatomy and how it relates to surface forms. Additional studio hours required.
AT-233	Storyboarding/Animatics	This course is an introduction to pre-production planning for special effects and animation as applied to multimedia, interactive media, video and film. The class will focus on communicating the drama of movement and special effects through effective design and pacing. Course topics include storytelling, storyboarding formats and flowcharts, along with sound track and script interpretation. Additional lab hours required.
AT-234	Fundamentals of Animation	This course teaches the basic principles of animation and how to apply them to create the convincing illusion of motion. They will explore the concepts of acting, staging, and storytelling through the creation of a number of short animated projects. Additional lab hours required.
AT-235	Animation Techniques: Digital 2D	Building upon what the students learned in Fundamentals of Animation, students will further explore techniques for the creation of animated films and videos. This course will introduce students to the use of sound and lip-sync. Students will learn a variety of strategies for creating digital 2D animation including cell, cut-out ("flash" animation), and freehand. Additional lab hours required.
AT-237	Figure Sculpture III	This is a continuation of AT 230, Figure Sculpture II. As students gain experience through advanced projects, emphasis will shift from acquiring foundation skills in three-dimensional figurative sculpture to concept development and individual direction. Additional studio hours required.
AT-238	Special Topics in Animation	1-3	This course allows for the exploration of special topics as they emerge in the field of animation, involving current software and delivery formats. Additional hours required.
AT-242	History of Graphic Communications	This is a survey course on the history of graphic communications as it developed throughout human history. This course covers the history and development of visual communication, as relayed through the use of fine and applied art, printed words and imagery. Students study how historical events and culture influence advertising and design. Design developments in different cultures and how they affect each other is also explored.
AT-246	Advanced Computer Art Applications	This course is a continuation of Computer Art Studio. Students learn advanced software techniques that apply to graphic design and illustration. Industry standard software is used. Additional lab hours required.
AT-249	Multidimensional Design and Printing	Students will learn to plan and design 3D objects and output them using 3D printers and other devices. Principles of 3D design will be examined, and various kinds of 3D printers will be explored, along with their operation and maintenance. The integration of 3D design and printing as a part of the creative process applied to various disciplines (such as product and packaging design) will be emphasized. Additional hours required.
AT-251	Computer Aided Kitchen and Bath Design	Utilizing 3-D design software, students will learn to layout, design and specify residential kitchens and baths. Students will create 2-D and 3-D visual presentations and renderings of kitchen and bath interiors.
AT-254	Workplace Learning: Interior Design	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the interior design industry to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum 150 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
AT-267	Color Photography II	Advanced instruction in the theory of color, materials of color photography, and techniques of color printing. Students will work with transparencies and color reversal materials and explore large format color processes. A portfolio of color prints will be created by the student. Additional studio hours required.
AT-275	Video Art II	A continued investigation into video art as a personal expressive media for the individual artist, including work with computers, sound equipment, photography, and other tools used in the contemporary art world. Students will have the opportunity to investigate these technologies as they combine the various media to make artistic statements based on personal concerns and aesthetic decisions. This course is specifically for the fine artist who wishes to use "low end" and/or "consumer" equipment as a creative media. Emphasis is on relatively complex projects and collaborative ventures, and further developing an individual style of personal expression with these strategies and technologies. Additional lab hours required. 
AT-276	Photo Imaging II: Photoshop	This course explores intermediate methods of working with continuous tone images in an efficient manner.  Topics include refinements in tonal and color adjustment tools, masking tools, typography tools, color modes, sharpening procedures, and compositing techniques. A portfolio of color images will be produced by the end of the course emphasizing the individual expressiveness of the student. Additional studio hours required.
AT-279	Alternative Photographic Processes	This course explores the use of non-traditional methods, and a variety of hand-applied emulsions, to produce photographic images. Students will have the opportunity to create prints using historic processes (cyanotype, Van Dyke brown, gum bichromate, etc.) on a variety of papers or fabrics, as well as working with other light-based formats. Additional lab hours may be required.
AT-280	Advanced Photography	1-4	This course is a course that emphasizes both the conceptual and technical challenges of creating a cohesive, related body of work for either a portfolio or exhibition. Additional lab hours required.
AT-281	Sculptural Mold Making	1-3	This course offers students individual attention in the variety of approaches to mold making within the field of art. Instruction may focus on any number of applications, including plaster waste, alginate, rubber, silicone, or fiberglass mold making. Objects to be molded and cast will vary along with the appropriate approach. Additional studio hours required.
AT-282	Workplace Learning: Graphic Communications	1-3	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the business to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum of 50  hours per credit in the workplace throughout the term is required.
AT-283	Digital Media Portfolio	Preparing effective presentations of creative work within current digital formats is the focus of this course. Students will learn to edit, record and prepare material for the development of an effective portfolio, aiding the completion of their studies in various career programs. Recommended preparation: Permission of program coordinator. Additional lab hours required.
AT-284	Special Topics in Illustration	1-3	This course allows for the exploration of special topics as they emerge in the field of illustration, especially as related to problem-solving in current design formats. Additional hours required.
AT-285	Interior Design Codes and Specifications	Interior Design Codes and Specifications explores codes, standards, and federal regulations that impact the design of the built environment. Students will analyze interior codes related to building and life safety, accessibility standards, sustainability practices, mechanical and electrical requirements, and furniture and finish selections. Students will then apply the codes requirements to interior design projects.
AT-286	Interior Design Business Practices and Ethics	Interior Design Business Practices and Ethics provides an overview of common business practices and ethical standards in the interior design profession. Students will gain an understanding of the characteristics of the interior design profession, analyze strategies and solutions to common ethical situations, and develop interior design business documents.
AT-287	Advanced Computer-Aided Interior Design	Advanced Computer-Aided Interior Design builds upon previous computer-aided interior design knowledge and introduces students to methods for utilizing building information modeling (BIM) software to create interior design drawings. Students will create presentation drawings, construction documents, schedules, and construction details for interior environments utilizing BIM software.
AT-288	Interior Detailing and Construction Documentation	Interior Detailing and Construction Documentation focuses on the process of developing concept drawings into comprehensive detailed drawings to clearly communicate design choices in interior environments. Students will create detailed casework and construction drawings utilizing computer-aided design software.
AT-289	Interior Design Research Methods	Interior Design Research Methods explores common research methods used in the interior design profession. Students will research interior design-related topics utilizing quantitative and qualitative methods and synthesize information into a comprehensive research project.
AT-290	Interior Design Professional Preparation	Interior Design Professional Preparation prepares students for the first phase of interior design professional certification. Students will explore the Interior Design Fundamental Examination (IDFX) content areas that cover the knowledge and skills interior designers must acquire to protect public health, safety, and welfare.
AUT-150	Automotive Fuel and Induction Systems	This course is a study of fuel and induction systems which includes gasoline fuel delivery systems, and diesel engines. Diagnosis and repair techniques as well as basics of the control systems will be covered.
AUT-151	Automotive Engine Operation	This course will be concerned with theory, design and repair procedures of the automotive engine including valves and lower engine service. Additional lab hours required.	
AUT-156	Automotive Electricity	This course is a study of the fundamentals of automotive electricity, magnetism, induction, and the use of wiring diagrams. This course also includes operating principles, diagnosis and repair of starting systems, charging systems, ignition systems, batteries, lighting and accessory circuits. Additional lab hours required.	
AUT-158	Charts, Diagrams and Handbook Usage	This course teaches the use of handbooks, with emphasis upon interpreting specifications and automotive charts and diagrams.	
AUT-167	Automotive Electronics	This course deals with advanced electrical systems including basics of electronic engine control systems, electronic functions, electronic system diagnosis and repair. Additional lab hours may be required.
AUT-168	Suspension and Steering I	This course will be concerned with the design principles, diagnosis and repair of the front and rear suspension systems including front-end alignment, 4-wheel alignment, manual and power steering assemblies and related components to include gears and linkages, as well as tire and wheel balance. Additional lab hours required.	
AUT-169	Suspension and Steering II	Continuation of AUT 168 including the design, principles of operation, diagnosis and repair of the following components  conventional brake systems, anti-lock brake systems, electronic steering and ride control systems. Attention is given to live car diagnosis and repair procedures related to frame, suspension, steering, and brake components. Additional lab hours required.
AUT-256	Automotive Powertrains	Theory of operation and service and service procedures of drive lines, constant velocity joints, manual transmissions and transaxles, differentials and clutches. 
AUT-259	Emissions and Drivability Diagnosis	This course emphasizes proper diagnostic procedures and use of proper test equipment such as oscilloscopes, exhaust analyzers, meters, and Powertrain Control test equipment. Additional lab hours required.
AUT-271	Diagnostic Equipment and Emissions	Students will learn proper diagnosis and troubleshooting procedures and related test equipment including oscilloscopes, infra-red exhaust analyzers, meters, gauges and diagnostic lane exposure. Additional lab hours required.
AUT-272	Accessories, Controls and Air Conditioning	This course emphasizes theory, operation and design of power windows, power seats, speed controls, vacuum systems, other accessories, and air conditioning. Additional lab hours may be required.
AUT-273	Automatic Transmissions and Transaxles	This course emphasizes the operations, theory, design and repair procedures of automatic transmissions and transaxles. Additional lab hours required.
AUT-281	Automotive Field Work I	This is an advanced course with practical application on customer's vehicles, involving student work on the diagnosis, testing, and repair of vehicles. Students have the responsibility of all shop functions. Emphasis of lab work will include five of the ASE service specialty areas. Additional lab hours required.
AUT-282	Automotive Field Work II	Continuation of AUT 281. Emphasis of lab work will include all eight ASE service specialty areas. Additional lab hours required.
AUT-291	Automotive Service Management	This is a Service Advisor training course complete with necessary management practices enabling a student to understand the set-up of the automotive service department. The studies include customer relations, repair order writing, and economics of shop operations. Additional hours required.	
AVI-101	General Mechanics, Drawings and Safety	This course covers several foundational topics for studying aviation maintenance. Safety in the work environment and mechanical drawings are covered, along with weight and balance requirements and working with pressurized fluid lines in a variety of aircraft systems. The general curriculum subjects included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix B, are Aircraft Drawings, Weight and Balance, and Fluid Lines and Fittings. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-102	Basic Electricity for Aviation Technicians	This course covers principles of electricity needed for aviation technicians. Corse material includes static and current electricity, terminology, magnetism, and circuits. Theory, testing and maintenance of batteries are included and solid state devices are introduced. The general curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix B, is Basic Electricity. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-103	Structural Materials and Corrosion Control	In this course, students learn materials identification, metalworking and fabrication processes. They also learn nondestructive testing procedures, corrosion treatment and prevention. The general curriculum subjects in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix B, are Materials and Processing, and Cleaning and Corrosion Control. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-104	Federal Regulations and Ground Operations	This course concerns the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) governing aircraft maintenance and mechanics' privileges and responsibilities regarding maintenance. Students learn research techniques, the correct use of FAA forms and how to make maintenance record entries. Ground operations encompasses shop and flight line safety, including fire, jacking and hazardous materials procedures, towing, taxiing and tie-down procedures, fueling procedures and standard hand signals. The general curriculum subjects in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix B are Maintenance Publications, Mechanic Privileges and Limitations, Maintenance forms and Records and Ground Operations and Servicing. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-105	Basic Physics for Aviation	This course covers principles of physics with applications in aviation maintenance. Topics include matter, energy, work, power, force, motion, and gas/fluid mechanics. The course introduces aerodynamics for fixed and rotor wing aircraft. The general curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix B, is Basic Physics. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-106	Quantitative Applications	In this course important principles of aerodynamics and computational skills essential for aviation technicians are reinforced through mathematical applications. Applications include topics such as weight, center of gravity, cylinder displacement and compression ratio. The general curriculum subject included in this course are required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix B, is Mathematics. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-121	Aircraft Non-metallic Structures and Finishes	This course covers aircraft maintenance principles that apply to the exterior surfaces and internal structures of an aircraft. Students learn about wooden structures, fabric coverings and the various paints and sealants that are used to protect them. The airframe curriculum subjects included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix C, are Aircraft Coverings, Aircraft Finishes and Wood Structures. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-122	Aviation Welding	Various types of welding, soldering and brazing used in aircraft structural materials are introduced in this course. Students will work with sheet steel, tube steel and other metals. The airframe curriculum subject in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix C, is Welding. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-123	Airframe Fuel Systems and Fire Detection	Students learn about the inspection, service and repair of fuel systems and components, and aircraft fire detection and extinguishing systems. The airframe curriculum subjects included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix C, are Aircraft Fuel Systems and Fire Protection.  Additional lab hours required.
AVI-124	Aircraft Metallic Structures	This course covers sheet metal and non-metallic aircraft structures introducing student to various materials used in fabrication and repair including fasteners, rivets, and sheet metal flat layouts. Students study composite structures, inspection methods, fabrication and repair procedures. The airframe curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix C, is Sheet Metal and Non-metallic Structures. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-125	Aircraft Fluid and Pneumatic Power Systems	This course covers the principles of hydraulic and pneumatic systems in aircraft and their purpose, inspection, service and repair. This includes in depth study of various landing gear and components, braking systems, wheels, tires and struts with emphasis on disassembly, inspection, removal and replacement of these systems and components. The airframe curriculum subjects included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, appendix C, are Aircraft Landing Gear Systems and Hydraulic and Pneumatic Power Systems. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-126	Rigging, Inspection, Cabin Environment, Ice and Rain	In this course students learn assembly procedures for aircraft components including flight control systems. They also learn about ice and rain control systems, and cabin temperature and pressure systems. The FAA regulations and procedures for inspecting an aircraft airframe are also included. The airframe curriculum subjects included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix C, are cabin Atmosphere Control Systems, Ice and Rain Control Systems, Assembly and Rigging, and Airframe Inspection. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-127	Communication/Navigation Systems	In this course students learn how aircraft communication and navigation systems work and how to install, inspect and check system components. The airframe curriculum subjects included in this course are required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix C, are Communication and Navigation Systems, Position Warning Systems and Aircraft Instrument Systems. Additional lab hours are required.
AVI-128	Aircraft Electrical Systems	This course covers the operation and maintenance of electrical and power distribution systems on aircraft as well as the fabrication and installation of electrical wiring or components. The airframe curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix C, is Aircraft Electrical Systems. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-131	Power Plant Electrical Systems	Students learn the principles and procedures governing charging systems and motors. The course will emphasize inspecting, servicing and repairing electrical system components in an aircraft power plant. The power plant curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix D is Engine Electrical Systems. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-132	Ignition and Starting Systems	Student learn the principles and procedures governing ignition and starting systems. Course material will include inspecting, servicing and repairing ignition and starting system components in an aircraft power plant. The power plant curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix D is Ignition and Starting. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-133	Airflow, Exhaust, Lubrication and Engine Instruments	This course covers the inspection, service and maintenance of non-engine accessory systems and instruments critical for the proper operation of reciprocating and turbine engines. The power plant curriculum subjects included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix D, are Induction and Engine Airflow Systems, Engine Cooling Systems, Engine Exhaust and Reversing Systems, Lubrication Systems and Engine Instrument System. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-134	Reciprocating Engines	This course addresses the theory, development and maintenance of reciprocating engines for aircraft. Projects will include disassembly, re-assembly, overhaul, repair, inspection, removal, installation and testing engine components. Students will further develop skills in the use of maintenance publications and documentation of maintenance activities. The power plant curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, appendix D is Reciprocating Engines.
AVI-135	Propeller Systems	The development and application of fixed-pitch through constant speed propellers is presented in this course. Students inspect, replace, service or repair propellers, their accessories or auxiliary systems. The use of maintenance publications and appropriate documentation of maintenance activities will be emphasized. The power plant curriculum subject include in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix D is Propellers. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-136	Power Plant Fuel and Fire Protection Systems	Students learn about aircraft fuel, engine fuel systems and components, and fuel  metering devices. Carburetors and injection systems are covered along with fuel systems, fire protection systems, pumps valves, filters and metering units. The power plant curriculum subjects included in the course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix D are Fuel Metering Systems, Engine Fuel Systems and Engine Fire Protection Systems. Additional lab hours required.
AVI-137	Turbine Engines	Theory and application of various types of turbine engines are provided in this course. Course material includes removal, replacement, installation, inspection, overhaul, repair and adjustment of turbine engines. The power plant curriculum subjects included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix D, are Turbine Engines, Auxiliary Power Systems and Unducted Fans.  Additional lab hours required.
AVI-138	Power Plant Inspections	This course requires students use skills developed in the power plant courses to inspect turbine or reciprocating engines, propellers, engine accessories and auxiliary systems. Students will use extensive research of maintenance publications and effective documentation of inspection activities. The power plant curriculum subject included in this course and required by Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) Part 147, Appendix D, is Engine Inspection. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-101	Introduction to Baking Theory	This course introduces the principles of food science and nutrition as they apply to baking and pastry arts. The Scientific Method is used to explore pastry ingredients and their function in product preparation and storage. Emphasis will be placed on formulation, ingredients, and sensory evaluations. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-105	Breads, Rolls, and Bakeries	This course introduces the techniques in preparation of assorted breads  quick breads, yeast-raised, laminated, and enriched doughs for the bakeshop as well as cookies, pies, and basic bakery staples. The use of baking equipment, scaling and shaping techniques, inventory control, baker's mathematics, and sanitation are covered. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-110	Production Pastry Techniques	This course is designed to give the student working knowledge of traditional and contemporary methods of producing puff pastry, pate a choux, creams, custards, tarts, and mousses. Fundamentals of production and finishing techniques are introduced. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-115	Cake Production and Decoration	This course is designed to expose students to the proper procedures for producing traditional and contemporary cakes. Emphasis will be placed on mixing methods of batters, fillings, and icings. Skills taught include cake decoration, piping techniques, writing with chocolate, and proper use of a pastry bag. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-150	Bakeshop Basics for Culinarians	This course is an introduction to the fundamentals of baking and pastry utilized in the culinary industry. Students will learn the theories of baking science, mathematics, and production techniques, along with the principles and procedures for producing basic breads, custards, mousses, pastries, and bakeries. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-160	Design for the Pastry Arts	This course will introduce students to the basic principles of drawing and design as it relates to the baking and pastry industry. Students will work with two-dimensional and three-dimensional formats to create a series of assigned projects. The study of color and color theories will also be explored. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-201	Artisan and Decorative Bread	This course will cover various styles of producing artisan and decorative bread. Instruction will include techniques of production utilizing various processes of fermentation. Elements of showpieces and decorative breads will be produced in class yielding attractive displays. Fundamentals of Baking Mathematics will play a key role in everyday production activities. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-205	Ice Cream and Frozen Desserts	This course introduces the multiple production techniques of frozen desserts. Students will be taught the fundamentals of balancing formulations, controlling texture, and developing flavor profiles, with an emphasis on the creation of classical and modern frozen desserts. Consumer marketing and evaluation will also occur during this class. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-210	Chocolate Candies and Showpieces	During this course, students will learn and utilize proper tempering techniques of chocolate. Hand-dipped and molded candies will be produced utilizing various methods. Variations of chocolates, fillings, manufacturing techniques, and decorations will be utilized in daily activities. Cocoa-based coloring and texturing mediums will be introduced and used to produce showpieces. Additional lab  hours required.
BAP-215	Plated Desserts	This course focuses on the preparation and presentation of plated desserts. Contemporary versions of traditional desserts will be created utilizing several styles of plate presentation. Advanced flavor development and menu planning will be introduced. Students will simulate a la carte restaurant plating techniques to present finished desserts. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-220	Sugar Candies and Showpieces	This course introduces students to the process of artistic design, drawing, and creation of two- and three-dimensional centerpieces utilizing sugar and pastillage. Students will also produce sugar-based candies utilizing various production methods. Additional lab hours required.
BAP-260	Baking and Pastry Arts Capstone	This culminating course focuses on the synthesis and application of the knowledge and skills necessary to successfully obtain the Certified Pastry Culinarian certification through the American Culinary Federation. Coursework will include written and practical baking assessments in preparation for this industry-recognized examination. Additional lab hours required.
BE-153	Workplace Learning: Biomedical Engineering Technology	This workplace-based course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the industry to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum 50 hours per credit hour in the workplace throughout the term. 
BE-160	Workplace Learning: Biomedical Electronics Technology	This workplace-based course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the industry to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum 50 hours per credit hour in the workplace throughout the term.
BE-254	Biomedical Applications	This course develops competencies, including maintenance, troubleshooting and repair, with such basic hospital equipment as transducers, amplifiers, processors, display modules, and respiratory and radiography instruments. Additional lab hours required.
BIC-101	Basic Building Inspection Techniques	This course offers the student an introduction to the general principles of building inspection. It includes current techniques of field inspections with emphasis on wood, steel frames, modern masonry and concrete design as employed in construction of buildings.
BIC-102	Housing Inspections and Programs	A course covering housing codes and housing inspection techniques. The need for the implementation of housing programs and their impact on the community is included.
BIC-103	Building Codes and Ordinances	This course offers a detailed study of national, state, and local ordinances geared to public safety, land use controls, and building codes. It will include a detailed summary of use philosophy and development of the latest edition of BOCA Building Codes.
BIC-104	Housing Inspection Problems	Housing evaluation skills as taught in this course shall cover  space requirements, sanitation requirements, comfort requirements, electrical requirements, maintenance standards, and environmental needs. The course should prepare persons for the task of evaluating existing residential housing. This preparation shall consist of teaching  1) requisite skills in detecting deficiencies; 2) know-how in correcting deficiencies; 3) systematic procedures for documentation and control of housing inspections.
BIC-200	Plumbing and Mechanical Inspection	An introduction to the theory of residential and commercial, industrial and institutional details of plumbing systems, safety principles, heating, cooling and ventilation, layouts and code inspection problems.
BIC-201	Electrical Inspection	Electrical inspection of buildings, residential, commercial, institutional, and industrial, based on the National Electrical Code, including electrical wiring procedures and layouts.
BIC-202	Administration of Building Regulations	This course offers an introduction to the effective administration of building and zoning regulations. Particular attention will be given to the major methods and procedures for the enforcement of building codes and ordinances. Procedures for the building department operations will also be discussed.
BIC-203	Plan Review I (Non-Structural)	This course provides the student with an understanding of building plans for residential, commercial, industrial and institutional building as related to the requirements of various codes and the zoning ordinances. Solutions to problems will be taught through the study of specific situations, employing an authentic set of plans. The student is taught to identify the problems on the plan and then to solve them by correct application of plan review.
BIC-204	Plan Review II (Structural)	This course provides the student with an understanding of building plans with emphasis on structural elements of building design. The student will be instructed in review and calculations of loads and sizing of structural elements of a building, including footings, foundations, beams and columns, walls, roofs, and floors.
BIC-205	Soils, Grading and Waste Water Control	This course offers the student the technical information necessary for the inspection of construction sites. It includes site investigations, soil analysis, solid mechanics, geology, grading, drainage, and retaining wall design and inspection.
BIO-100	Introduction to Life Science Laboratory Skills	This course is part of the Certificate of Specialization in Life Science Laboratory Assistant program. Students will practice basic lab skills in a research laboratory setting. Pipetting, solution and media preparation, dilutions, sterile technique, separation methods, lab math, quality control, documentation, and other appropriate skills are taught with an emphasis on standard lab instrumentation, calibration or verification, and maintenance. Addition lab hours required.
BIO-103	Problems in Anatomy	A course dealing with the anatomy of the human body; study of the structure of cells, tissues, organs, and systems with emphasis on those subjects important to embalming. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-104	Basic Laboratory Methods for Biotechnology	This course introduces basic laboratory skills in preparation for Biotechnology I. Topics and techniques include safety, sterile technique, laboratory math, quality systems, documentation, collection of data, metrology, filtration, solution and mini prep, and other appropriate laboratory methods. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-105	Topics in Evolution	This is an introductory course emphasizing both evolutionary mechanisms and evolutionary history. Areas of interest will include evolution as a process, the development of biological diversity, reconstructing past evolutionary events, and the evolution of major groups, including humans.
BIO-106	Human Heredity	This course will introduce students to basic concepts in human heredity. Areas of emphasis will include patterns of inheritance, population genetics, the genetics of immunity and cancer, genetic engineering, gene therapy, and reproductive technologies. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-109	Human Biology	This course is an introduction to basic human structure, function and the human body's interaction with its surroundings, including cell theory, genetics, systems biology, ecology and evolution. This course does not fulfill any of the Allied Health and Nursing program requirements at St Louis Community College. This course may fulfill Allied Health and Nursing program requirements at other institutions.
BIO-110	General Zoology	This course provides a survey of the animal kingdom with emphasis on comparative anatomy, physiology, ecology and evolution of the major invertebrate and vertebrate groups. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-111	Introductory Biology I	Introductory Biology provides a consideration of the principles of biology, with emphasis on the molecular approach to the structure and function of living organisms. This course is for liberal arts students and majors in physical education, physical and occupational therapy, nursing, and other allied health areas. (Credit is not allowed for both BIO 111 and BIO 140). Additional lab hours required.
BIO-113	Modern Aspects of Biology	This course provides a consideration of the principles of biology as they relate to socially relevant issues in nutrition, reproduction, sexuality, heredity, and disease.
BIO-117	Conservation and Ecology	This course focuses on the environment and the effects that mankind is having on the Earth. Interrelationships of living things to their environment and to each other are discussed with particular focus on the impact of humans on the environment. Mankind's use and abuse of renewable and non-renewable natural resources are also considered.
BIO-120	Field Zoology	A natural history of animals using a wide variety of Missouri habitats. Topics will include insects and other invertebrates, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals, conservation and the history of wildlife populations in Missouri. Techniques for collection, preservation or live maintenance and identification will be covered. Not intended for Biology majors.
BIO-122	Human Sexuality	Human sexuality includes not only the biological component of male and female sexuality but also attitudes, values and feelings about one's own gender and sex role. Consequently, in dealing with sex as a natural biological function, the expression of which is a dimension of psychosocial behavior, the sexual development and/or differentiation of men and women from conception to maturity will be stressed. Same course as PSY 125.
BIO-123	Animal Behavior	This course is an introductory course in invertebrate and vertebrate animal behavior. Emphasis will be placed on biological clocks, migrational patterns, reproductive strategies and hormones. The reoccurring theme will be the role of genetics and evolution in driving behavior. 
BIO-124	General Botany I	Students will be introduced to the biological aspects of plant life, including cell structure and function, anatomy, morphology, physiology, taxonomy. The laboratory reinforces some of the topics and concepts covered in the lecture. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-140	Principles of Biology I	Quantitatively oriented for pre-medicine, pre-dentistry, pharmacy, biology and other science majors. A consideration of the principles of biology, with emphasis on the molecular approach to the structure and function of living organisms. (Credit is not allowed for both BIO 111 and BIO 140). Additional lab hours required.
BIO-141	Principles of Biology II	A continuation of BIO 140 with emphasis on selected topics in biology covering population genetics, evolution, survey of living plants and animals, ecology and conservation of natural resources. (Credit is not allowed for both BIO 112 and BIO 141). Additional lab hours required.
BIO-144	Marine Biology	This course introduces students to marine organisms and ecosystems. The interplay of organisms and their environment and other aspects of marine ecology are stressed.
BIO-148	Ozark Ecology	This course introduces students to one of the most biological diverse ecosystems in the Midwest. It will focus on the interaction of plants and animals with unique Ozark natural communities such as oak-hickory forests, glades, bluffs, caves, springs, and streams. Management and land use practices affecting this ecosystem will be reviewed. An optional 1-2 week field experience course (BIO 149) is available to students who successfully complete this lecture course.
BIO-151	Biology of Human Health and Disease	This course examines human health and disease from a biological perspective. It will also explore the evolution of microbes and human disease and the influences that regular exercise, diet, and genetic factors have on every day good health. The course will also explore mechanisms, manifestations, and prevention of common diseases, such as heart disease and cancer.
BIO-152	Quantitative Methods in Biotechnology	This course is designed to instruct students in the common calculations encountered in a cellular-molecular research setting.
BIO-154	The Biology of Human Sex	This course covers the biological aspects of human sexuality. Topics include male and female reproductive systems, sexual gender, sexually transmitted infections, contraception, assisted reproductive techniques and the development of the fetus. This course will also cover typical and atypical behaviors of sexuality.
BIO-156	Native Landscaping for Wildlife and People	The field study course focuses on which native wildflowers, grasses, shrubs, and trees furnish food and cover for wildlife and provide attractive native landscapes of flowers, fruits, and leaves for people. Highlights include 1) investigating biodiversity and sustainability of natural communities, 2) selecting best-adapted species, and 3) designing, planting, and maintaining native landscapes.
BIO-203	General Microbiology I	Introduction to microbes with emphasis on morphology, culture techniques and biochemical activities of bacteria, viruses and fungi.  A consideration of human disease producing organisms with regard to their infection and resistance. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-207	Anatomy and Physiology I	A study of the organization of cells into tissues, organs, and organ systems, with special in-depth study of the integumentary, skeletal, muscular, nervous and endocrine system, and the sensory receptors. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-208	Anatomy and Physiology II	A continuation of BIO 207 with consideration given to the integrative functions of the cardiovascular, digestive, respiratory, urogenital and reproductive systems. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-209	Kinesiology Fundamentals	Kinesiology is the study of human movement. It involves applying the anatomy of the musculo-skeletal system to functional movement as a basis to understanding of exercise. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-215	Human Body Systems	This course is a study of the organization and integration of the body's systems. The course progresses from the organization of cells into tissues, organs, and organ systems, to an in-depth study of the physiology, diseases, and other abnormal conditions of the body. Additional hours required.
BIO-218	Microbiology for Biotechnology	A course for biotechnology majors providing a detailed exposure to structure, metabolism, genetics and growth characteristics of microbes and viruses as well as the role they play in disease, ecological and industrial applications. The structure and function of the immune system will also be covered. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-219	Biotechnology I	This course introduces basic biotechnology skills in preparation for Biotechnology II. Topics and techniques may include safety, cGMP, agarose gel electrophoresis, plasmid construction, ELISA, PAGE, PCR, mammalian cell culture, rapid plant genotyping and other molecular research techniques. Additional laboratory hours required.
BIO-220	Biotechnology II	A project-oriented course applying the fundamental DNA and protein manipulation techniques used in biotechnology/bioengineering research laboratories in academia and industry. Additional lab hours required.
BIO-221	Workplace Learning: Biotechnology	This workplace-based course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the industry to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum of 50 hours per credit hour in the workplace throughout the term. Additional hours required.
BIO-223	Research Techniques in Biology	1-3	Students will participate in research projects that can include introduction to HPLC, cell culture, histology techniques, or research in molecular ecology or molecular genetics. Exposure to data processing, data analysis, poster or manuscript preparation and presentation may also be included. Contact the instructor for current research project information.
BIO-225	Genetics	This course for life science majors reviews the fundamental principles of inheritance, including classical genetic theory, as well as recent advances in the molecular basis of heredity. Additional hours required.
BIO-226	Advanced Topics in Biotechnology	This lecture/laboratory course consists of current techniques used in biotechnology research and industry. Topics can include, but are not limited to, techniques from biomedical, pharmaceutical, agricultural, environmental, microbiological, bioprocessing, biocomputing, and/or bioethical aspects of biotechnology. Life science research and industry scientists will be employed as instructors. Additional lab hours required.
BLW-101	Business Law I	A survey course which considers an introduction to the judicial system, as well as principles of law in the following areas  legal ethics, constitutional law contracts, torts, products, liability, intellectual property and business crime.
BLW-201	Legal Environment of Business	This course covers an introduction to law and the judicial system, business organizations, contracts, torts, property, agency or administrative law, antitrust, labor-management, international and other topics such as law related to energy, health, safety and the environment.
BUS-101	Small Business Management	A comprehensive survey course which deals with the theoretical and practical aspects of starting and operating a small business. Each major function of business (accounting, production, marketing) is discussed with particular reference to small business. Students taking this course are normally not encouraged to enroll subsequently in BUS 104 due to similarity of course content.
BUS-103	Business Mathematics	This course includes a review of basic arithmetic  fractions, decimals, ratios, non-decimal numbering systems, and graphical representation of numbers. It also covers fundamental problems involving interest, mark-ups, commissions, payroll, taxes, depreciation, consumer credit, insurance and security transactions. Students will analyze simple financial statements, discounts, volume/profit relationships, and banking records.
BUS-104	Introduction to Business Administration	This is a survey course designed to give the student general knowledge of the modern business world and the environments within which it exists. Students are introduced to functional areas that work together to create products and services.
BUS-201	Elementary Statistics	This course introduces the student to the basic principles and methods of statistical measurement and statistical inference.  Descriptive statistical concepts include data organization and presentation, measures of location and dispersion, probability theory and distributions. Applications of statistical inference include random sampling techniques and sampling distributions, interval estimation, hypothesis testing for large and small samples, ANOVA, correlation, regression analysis, and nonparametric testing.
BUS-250	Workplace Learning: Business and Economics	1-3	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the business to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum 50 hours per credit hour in the workplace throughout the term.
CE-108	Construction Methods	This course covers many of the principles, materials, and methods used in light construction. Topics include building codes, construction standards and specializations, wood and wood products, concrete, masonry, glass, plastics, aluminum products, bituminous products, gypsum products, asbestos cement products, construction methods systems, foundation systems, slabs-on-ground, floor/ceiling systems, wood framed floors, wall systems, masonry walls, roof/ceiling systems, stucco, and terrazzo.
CE-115	Construction Materials and Methods	This course is an introduction to the elements of building construction principles and materials. Students will learn the background and history of building materials and systems; review sustainable design, materials, and construction concepts; and review industry standards, specifications, codes and barrier-free design.
CE-116	Construction Blueprint Reading	The interpretation of construction working drawings and specifications for residential and commercial building projects. Architectural, structural, and utility drawings will be covered.
CE-117	Statics and Strength of Materials	This course deals with the fundamental principles of structural design. Topics include the analysis of structures to determine internal and external forces and the design of members and connections based on allowable bending, tension, compression and shearing stresses. The graphical analysis of statics problems is included. Students considering careers as architects or engineers should enroll in this course, rather than in Structures for Technicians. Additional lab hours required.
CE-118	Sustainable Construction	The emphasis in this class is on the 'green building' revolution, its socioeconomic importance and impact, how sustainable construction differs from the traditional approach, the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) and Green Globes rating systems and how these rating systems impact various aspects of a building and its components and systems.
CE-130	Introduction to Construction	An introductory course providing an overview of the total construction process including city and regional planning, construction management, contracting, labor and management relations, the design process, estimating and bidding, scheduling and purchasing, construction, and equipment.
CE-131	Construction Estimating	The total estimating and bidding process.  Topics will include  bid form contracts, specifications, overhead, unit costs, quantity surveys, subcontract bids, pricing, checking and alternates. Students should be able to read construction drawing prior to enrolling in this course.
CE-132	Construction Scheduling	Construction scheduling methods to include bar graphs and Critical Path Method with emphasis on manual and computerized design, calculations, and interpretation using both arrow and precedence diagramming.
CE-151	Introduction to Civil Engineering and Architecture	This course is an introduction to many of the varied factors involved in building design and construction including building components and systems, structural design, storm water management, site design, utilities and services, cost estimation, energy efficiency, and careers in the design and construction industry. Additional lab hours required.
CE-230	Construction Materials and Testing	The properties and standard tests used in construction on soils, aggregates, bituminous products, and concrete. Additional lab hours required.
CE-235	Construction Office Practice	The interactive role of organizations in the construction process; the structure of alternative construction delivery systems, such as general contractor, construction manager, and design-build contractor; specification and building codes; cost control reporting systems for construction.
CE-240	Surveying I	This course will explore the history and practice of surveying, the use and care of transits, levels, and tapes, as well as their more modern counterparts. Office and field methods will emphasize laboratory problems in area measurements, elevation determinations, angle collection methods, traverse calculations and topographic map compilation. Additional hours required.
CE-247	Legal Aspects of Boundary Surveying	Topics covered will include legal principles of surveying, Missouri survey law, legal principles of boundaries, property, monumentation, legal descriptions, deed interpretations, and legal aspects of surveying and professional liability.
CE-248	Fundamentals of Land Surveying	This course includes essential elements necessary in the initiation and follow through of any property survey; evidence of ownership, historical information in the subdivision of public lands, methods of measurements, description of property and legal requirements for recording.
CE-250	Surveying II	This is an intermediate course in land surveying techniques applicable to the office and field practices. It explores the theory, history and practice of route surveying, including the use of simple horizontal curves, vertical curves, spirals, super-elevations and earth-work computations as applied to highway and railroad surveying. Additional introductory topics may include but are not limited to  photogrammetry, astronomy and GIS. Additional hours required.
CHI-101	Elementary Chinese I	This course is a beginning course that presents the basic structure and vocabulary necessary to participate in elementary Chinese conversations. Students will communicate in written form using the Pinyin style of writing and will learn the correct tones for spoken Chinese.
CHI-102	Elementary Chinese II	Continuation of CHI 101. Concentration will be placed on vocabulary acquisition and the oral use of the language.
CHM-101	Fundamentals of Chemistry I	Fundamental of Chemistry I is a one semester course which presents the fundamental concepts  and symbolism of chemistry with applications to everyday life. The course is suited for allied health students and for students not planning to major in science. Laboratory work presents opportunity to use laboratory equipment, emphasizes observations and measurements, and provides elementary quantitative and qualitative analysis. Additional hours required.
CHM-102	Fundamentals of Chemistry II	This course presents the fundamental concepts of organic chemistry and biochemistry. It is suited for allied health students and for students not planning to major in chemistry. Topics include basic structure and reactions of organic molecules and a survey of carbohydrates, lipids, amino acids and proteins, with an introduction to metabolic pathways. Laboratory work emphasizes observations. Additional lab hours required.
CHM-105	General Chemistry I	General Chemistry I is a one-semester course designed for science-related majors that emphasizes the fundamental principles of chemistry. Topics include measurement, physical and chemical processes, nomenclature, atomic structure, quantum theory, stoichiometry, molecular structure, bonding theory, physical properties of gases, thermochemistry, and properties of solutions. Upon completion of the course, students should be able to demonstrate an understanding of the fundamental chemical laws and concepts and will obtain prerequisite chemical knowledge needed for advancement to General Chemistry II. Additional lab hours required.
CHM-106	General Chemistry II	This course is a continuation of General Chemistry I. Topics include quantitative analysis of kinetics, equilibrium, thermodynamics, electrochemistry, nuclear chemistry, and some descriptive chemistry and organic chemistry. It includes laboratory work involving qualitative and quantitative analysis. Completion of the course provides students with an understanding of general chemical laws and concepts, and prerequisite knowledge needed for higher level chemistry courses.  Additional lab hours required.
CHM-109	Chemistry and the Environment	This course is a one-semester course presenting the concepts and symbolism of chemistry with an emphasis on the natural environment and applications to everyday life. This course is suited for students who have a general interest in the study of chemistry in a course containing a laboratory component and is not intended for students planning to major in science or enter an allied health field. Additional lab hours required.
CHM-114	Industrial Chemistry	This is a non-laboratory lecture and demonstration course covering elementary chemistry with emphasis on potentially dangerous chemicals in fires and in other industrial situations. The course is not intended for chemistry or engineering majors.
CHM-206	Organic Chemistry Lecture I	An introductory course in the theory of Organic Chemistry, stressing reaction types and mechanisms.
CHM-207	Organic Chemistry Lecture II	A continuation of CHM 206 including relevant new topics such as polymers and biochemicals.
CHM-210	Organic Chemistry Lab I	This course is an introduction to the laboratory work in organic chemistry. The emphasis of the course is on generally-employed laboratory techniques for purification and characterization of organic compounds and an introduction to laboratory instrumentation. Additional lab hours required.
CHM-211	Organic Chemistry Lab II	This course is a continuation of CHM 210 Organic Chemistry Lab I. The emphasis of the course is on synthesis of organic compounds, including multi-step syntheses, and on characterization and analysis of organic compounds and exploration of instrumentation. Additional lab hours required.
CHM-213	Chemical Technology Seminar	Present basic electricity and electronic theory, techniques, and hardware to chemical technology students who have no previous formal training in this area. Manual skills (soldering, wire splicing, minor electrical repairs, troubleshooting) will be emphasized. This course presents a practical exposure to simple electronic schematic interpretations, location of test points and component identification. Some elementary breadboarding using commercially available training kits will be presented. The use of various volt/ohm meters and test equipment will be introduced. Real and simulated electrical/electronic troubleshooting situations will be presented using actual analytical chemistry instrumentation.
CHM-214	Advanced Chemical Technology Seminar	Emphasis on specialized laboratory techniques and procedures in advances in analytical chemistry instrumentation. An introduction to chemical literature searches both manually and by computer will be presented using both in-house and external consultants and facilities. This course will explore the opportunities and profession of chemical technicians. Specialized resources, advances, and professionals will be presented in seminar format. Specialized topics (ethics, chemical waste disposal and separations) will be included.
CHM-221	Chemical Technology III	The specific purpose of this course is to provide part of two years of training for a career as a chemical technologist. Organic chemistry theory is introduced with laboratory work focusing on organic separation and synthesis techniques. Infrared spectrophotometric analysis of a variety of samples complements the laboratory work. Additional hours required.
CHM-222	Chemical Technology IV	The specific purpose of this course is to provide part of two years of training for a career as a chemical technologist. Organic chemistry theory is continued with nuclear magnetic resonance spectrophotometric analysis complementing the laboratory work. Gas chromatographic techniques are covered for both qualitative and quantitative analysis. Additional hours required.
CHM-231	Chemical Technology V	The specific purpose of this course is to provide part of two years of training for a career as a chemical technologist. Organic chemistry theory and lab practice is introduced complemented with mass spectrophotometric analysis. High pressure liquid chromatographic techniques for both qualitative and quantitative analysis are covered.  Additional hours required.
CHM-232	Chemical Technology VI	The specific purpose of this course is to provide part of two years of training for a career as a chemical technologist. Biochemical theory is introduced with laboratory work focusing on biochemical separation and purification techniques. Electrophoretic analysis of a variety of samples complements the laboratory work. Additional hours required.
CLT-100	Orientation to the Medical Laboratory	Orientation to the profession of medical technology, its functions, specialties and responsibilities. The philosophy and ethics of the practice of medical technology are considered and interpersonal relationship of technologist to medical staff, laboratory staff, patient and other departments. Medical terminology will be stressed as well.
CLT-101	Medical Microbiology	Theory and principles of micro-organisms and human disease. Growth requirement of micro-organisms with consideration of media, biochemical reactions, susceptibility testing will be studied. Application of theory will be practiced in laboratory sessions. Additional lab hours required.
CLT-110	Urinalysis and Body Fluids	This course is an introduction to urine and body fluid analysis. It includes the anatomy and physiology of the kidney, physical, chemical and microscopic examination of urine, cerebrospinal fluid, and other body fluids as well as quality control, quality assurance and safety. Practical application will be stressed. Addition hours required.
CLT-111	Hematology and Coagulation	This course is an introduction to the theory and principles of the physiology of blood forming organs. Blood cell maturation, blood dyscrasia, techniques of staining, counting and diffferentiating cell morphology will be presented. Additional lab hours required.
CLT-113	Pathogenic Bacteriology	This course presents the study of micro-organisms with emphasis on the bacteria associated with human diseases. Theory and principles of isolation, identification, biochemical reactions, growth requirements, and susceptibility testing will be considered. Theory and practical application will be stressed. Addition lab hours required.
CLT-115	Immunology and Serology	This course is the study of the theories and principles of immunological reactions. Included are antigen-antibody reactions, complement action, humoral and cellular immune response, and other body defenses, and reactions to infectious and non-infectious agents. Serological methodology will also be discussed, demonstrated, and practiced. Additional lab hours required.
CLT-120	Clinical Laboratory Skill Development	This course provides practice of fundamental skills common to most clinical laboratories. Skills such as pipetting, phlebotomy, use of small instruments, laboratory mathematics, determination of cell counts and other diagnostic procedures will be developed. Quality assurance and problem-solving skills will be emphasized.
CLT-202	Clinical Practice I	Practical experience is attained in one of the clinical affiliated laboratories. The students rotate through each of the major departments of the clinical (medical) laboratory and are closely supervised by bench technologists and faculty. Rotation and practical experience is gained in microbiology, clinical chemistry, blood bank, hematology, urinalysis, serology and immunology departments.
CLT-207	Clinical Practice II	A continuation of CLT 202. Twenty-four hours clinical practice each week in hospital or private laboratories.
CLT-211	Parasites, Fungi and Intracellular Pathogens	The role of parasites, fungi, and intracellular organisms in human diseases with emphasis on differential microscopic and culture methods are presented. Diagnostic tests used for identification and susceptibility testing will be discussed. Practical application will be stressed. Additional lab hours required.
CLT-213	Introduction to Clinical Chemistry	This course is an introduction to the principles and procedures of various laboratory tests performed in Clinical Chemistry. Specimen collection, instrumentation, mathematical calculations and quality control will be discussed. An introduction to proteins, carbohydrates and lipids will be provided.
CLT-215	Immunohematology	This course includes the basic immunological and genetic principles governing blood groups and transfusion medicine. Theory and principles of routine laboratory testing procedures will be presented. Additional lab hours required.
CLT-217	Clinical Chemistry	This course is an advanced study of the principles and procedures of various laboratory tests performed in the chemistry department. The clinical significance of proteins, enzymes, carbohydrates, lipids, electrolytes and blood gases will be covered. Endocrinology, therapeutic drug monitoring and toxicology will be discussed.
CLT-219	Professional Skills Seminar	This course will stress the inter-relationships of laboratory tests correlated with diseases. Significance of laboratory testing and results will be taught with a dynamic overview of diagnosis and prognosis. The course also includes cross cultural communication and principles of technical training sufficient to orient a new employee. Additional lab hours required.
COL-100	Freshman Academic Orientation	Through interactive learning experiences, Freshman Academic Orientation introduces students to college level thinking skills, interpersonal skills, and effective study skills necessary for academic success. Students have the opportunity to participate in a faculty/student academic mentoring program.
COL-101	College Survival and Success	This course is designed to facilitate a successful academic experience for first semester Gateway to College students. Students will be assisted in the personal, academic and social adjustments needed for college success. Learning styles, stress management, identification of personal strengths and weaknesses in learning, managing time, and the integration of school, work, and family are emphasized. Credit will not be given for this course if COL 100 and/or COL 507 is also taken. Co-requisite  Concurrent enrollment in the Gateway to College program is required.
COM-101	Oral Communication I	This is the basic course in speech communication. It offers students an opportunity to explore effective one-to-one, small group, and large group oral communication processes. Emphasis is placed on a theoretical/conceptual approach as well as skill development and application or oral communication concepts to various communication settings and relationships. 
COM-103	Small Group Communication	A study of the principles and concepts of small group communication. Students are encouraged to develop and improve their skills for business management, education, community activities and interpersonal communication.
COM-104	Persuasion	This course examines the principles of persuasion as they apply to a wide variety of communication formats and situations. Students are given the opportunity to analyze and create persuasive messages that pertain to work, relationships, the mass media, and the arts. The course focuses on the skills necessary to become a more effective sender and receiver of persuasive communication.
COM-105	Interview Process	This course will provide students with an understanding of the interview process, the principles involved, types of interview questions and their uses, and interview structures.
COM-107	Public Speaking	This course studies the role of public speaking in communication through the theory and practice of researching, organizing, and delivering of public presentations. Audience analysis, critical listening, and the ethical dimensions of communication are also emphasized. Skills are developed through practicing speech fundamentals and analyzing contemporary and classical presentations.
COM-110	Organizational Communication in a Global Age	This course examines the communication systems and behaviors within organizations functioning in a global society. Students develop systematic improvement of communication skills as employer and/or employee necessary for success in national and transnational organizations. Additionally, students gain a more in-depth understanding of the way communication functions in organizations including variations in management styles, intercultural communication competence, and effective business presentations and writing. The course also includes opportunities to practice using and evaluating effective communication skills in diverse organizational contexts.
COM-111	Voice and Articulation	Principles and practice of improving voice, articulation, pronunciation, foreign and regional dialects. Primary emphasis on individual speech improvement. Frequent use of audio-video tape for self evaluation.
COM-114	Oral Interpretation of Literature	This course focuses on the analysis and effective oral communication of literature. Course goals include increasing appreciation and understanding of literature through performance and the development of an expressive and responsive communication style.
COM-117	Health Communication	This course focuses on patient-provider interactions and health literacy through communication theory and techniques for developing communication competency. Students are given the opportunity to examine and discuss content pertaining to health interactions with healthcare professionals, patients, other providers, corporate entities such as insurance companies, and those of varies cultural backgrounds. Skills are developed through a variety of assignments such as discussion, role play, presentations, and other practical applications.
COM-120	Gender Communication	This course is aimed at increasing students' understanding of how men and women communicate across a variety of settings and relationships. Students explore ways to improve communication behaviors and strategies in various contexts. Topics include biological, sociological, and cultural factors influencing gender identity; nonverbal and verbal communication styles; and images of men and women in society and the media.
COM-200	Communication Between Cultures	This course introduces the topic of Intercultural Communication, including the communication process, perception, verbal/nonverbal symbols, beliefs, values, world view, norms, identity, and social institutions. Barriers such as stereotyping, language, and culture shock are examined as well as case studies, cultural research, relationships, and communication skills.
COM-201	Interpersonal Communication	This course will take a theoretical case study examination of interpersonal communication. Relational issues as they pertain to communication will be examined in depth. These issues will include  conflict, stages of relationships, power, assertiveness, message analysis, and self-awareness.
CRJ-101	American Correctional System	A study of the correctional process from law enforcement through the administration of justice, probation, parole, prisons and correctional institutions. A study of the history and philosophy of corrections.
CRJ-102	Rehabilitation, Parole, and Probation	Analysis and evaluation of the concept and practices of rehabilitation in contemporary correctional systems; discussion of correctional institutions and the various field services. Development, organization, operation and result of systems of probation and parole.
CRJ-111	Rules of Criminal Evidence	The study of basic rules of evidence applicable to the investigation of criminal activities and other related police duties.  Emphasis is placed on the question of admissibility of evidence and the practical application of procedural and substantive guarantees.
CRJ-122	Introduction to Criminal Justice	The history and philosophy of the system of criminal justice in America, identifying the various sub-systems; role expectations, and their interrelationships; theories of crime, punishment and rehabilitation.
CRJ-123	Juvenile Justice	The organization, functions and jurisdiction of juvenile agencies; the detention of juveniles and the processing of neglected and abused children. The intent, application, and procedures of the Missouri Juvenile Code; juvenile case disposition, rights of juveniles, crime prevention methods and reporting procedures.
CRJ-124	Criminal Law and Procedures	An introduction to the study of criminal, common, and statutory law within the context of enforcement.
CRJ-206	Management of Human Conflicts	Explores the areas of potential conflict that can occur between members of the criminal justice community and various ethnic, racial, and regional sub-cultures. The root causes of the potential conflicts in both criminal justice organizations and occupational subcultures will be investigated. Issues of prejudice and discriminatory practices, both real and perceived, will be discussed as factors contributing to conflict. Proactive and reactive intervention techniques will be addressed in order to learn how to keep potential conflict from becoming actual conflicts.
CRJ-207	Police Supervision	A comprehensive overview of police personnel, recruiting, selection, training, promotion, personnel development, discipline, control, communication, labor relation issues, and current problems and theories facing the first level line police manager. Emphasis is placed on both individual and organizational development.
CRJ-208	Correctional Policies and Procedures	The study of policies, procedures and supervision in the field of Corrections.
CRJ-209	Criminal Justice Practicum	A field work experience in Criminal Justice organizations. Students are expected to commit themselves to 120 hours of work experience during the semester.
CRJ-211	Criminal Justice Practicum Seminar	Discussion and analysis in small groups of the Criminal Justice Practicum experience.
CRJ-212	Criminal Investigation	The study of the criminal act and its investigation, including specific crimes against persons and property. The process of fact-gathering and problem of legally admissible proof will be considered.
CRJ-213	Victimology	This course examines the criminal justice process from the perspective of the victim, their families, and society. Emphasis is placed on the etiology of trauma, motivational issues of offending, the probability and effects of victimization and response patterns to victimization by criminal justice practitioners, the community and the media.
CRJ-214	Introduction to Homeland Security	This course is an introduction to the different topics associated with Homeland Security. The impact of historical events, laws associated with Homeland Security, affiliated agencies as well as technology, communication and the future of Homeland Security are explored.
CRJ-215	Transportation and Border Security	This course provides an in-depth view of modern border and transportation security. Topics include security for seaports, ships, aircraft, trains, trucks, pipelines and buses. The course also focuses on the technology needed to detect terrorists and their weapons in addition to the legal, economic, political and cultural aspects of terrorism.
CRJ-216	Intelligence Analysis and Security Management	This course examines intelligence analysis and its indispensable relationships to the security management of terrorist attacks, man-made and natural disasters. It also explores vulnerabilities of our national defense and private sectors, as well as the threats posed to these institutions. It examines intelligence support of homeland security measures implemented by the United States and how the intelligence community operates.
CUL-101	Safety and Sanitation	This course will prepare students to take the ServSafe Food Protection Manager Certification exam. Content focuses on the sanitation and safety issues involved with handling food through the foodservice process. The course will cover the causes and prevention of foodborne illness, laws for consumer protection, pest prevention, and the principals of Hazard Analysis & Critical Control Points (HACCP). Additional hours required.
CUL-110	Food Preparation Practical I	The student will master competencies for tools and equipment, kitchen organization, converting and following recipes, applying safety and sanitation, vegetable cuts (American Culinary Federation competition cuts), stocks, soups, sauces, basic cooking methods, and introduction to meat, and poultry preparation. Additional hours required.
CUL-115	Food Preparation Theory & Practical II	This course introduces the student to the subject of meats and their application in foodservice operations. Students will learn about the muscle and bone structure of beef, veal, pork, lamb, poultry and fish; fabrication methods for sub-primal and foodservice cuts; and proper tying and trussing methods. Topics will include meat inspection, quality and yield grading, costing and yield testing, purchasing specifications, preferred cooking methods for all meats, proper knife selection, and butchery equipment. Sanitation and safety standards will be stressed throughout. Additional hours required.
CUL-120	Food Preparation Theory & Practical III	The student will master the foundation of cooking techniques and theories from Food Prep Theory I & II. Emphasis is placed on individual as well as team production. The focus is on cooking fundamentals, ratios, and formulas in a professional kitchen. Additional hours required.
CUL-150	Culinary Essentials for the Pastry Arts	This course will introduce students enrolled in the Baking and Pastry Arts curriculum to the fundamentals of savory food production. Proper methods of preparing stocks, soups, sauces, classical vegetable cuts, and basic cooking principles for meat, poultry, seafood, sandwiches, breakfast, starches, vegetables, and salads will be paramount. Additional hours required.
CUL-201	Garde Manger	This course is designed for cold food production and Charcuterie. The course will allow the student to develop fundamental principles of the cold kitchen including methods of salad and sandwich preparation. Aspic Gelee, Chaud Froid, Hors de oeuvres, canapes and appetizers, buffet and platter presentations, ice and vegetable carvings, pickling, smoking and condiments. Students will also gain an understanding of various cheese categories and their culinary uses. Additional hours required.
CUL-205	Global Cuisine	In this course students prepare, taste, serve, and evaluate traditional, regional dishes of Europe and the Mediterranean, Asia, Africa and Middle East. Emphasis will be placed on ingredients, flavor profiles, preparation, and techniques representative of various global cuisines. Additional hours required.
CUL-210	Nutritional Cooking	This course is a study of nutritional cooking. We know that a healthy diet is based on eating a wide variety of high quality foods that provide balanced nutrition. This course is designed to acquaint foodservice professionals with the knowledge and skills to do so. Additional hours required.
CUL-215	American Regional Cuisine	This course introduces the student to regional American cuisine from nine distinct regional culinary and two specialty traditions within North American cuisine. Students will gain the opportunity to develop professional culinary skills in classic and contemporary formats. Additional hours required.
CUL-250	Culinary Arts Capstone	The course will be operational in nature by requiring the student to use both technical knowledge and managerial ability to organize and complete a commercial simulation of a one meal operation. The application of theory will be used and tested in the lab setting. Additional hours required.
DA-143	Chairside Assisting: Operative Dentistry	This course provides the basic principles and theory of common restorative dental procedures. Emphasis is placed on instrumentation and materials preparation and use, and the assistant's role in chairside restorative procedures.
DA-144	Preclinical Practice	This preclinical course gives the student an opportunity to apply knowledge and practice basic dental assisting skills and clinical support functions in the laboratory setting. Additional lab hours required.
DA-149	Dental Terminology	An introduction to the structure and function of teeth and oral cavity components. Additional topics include dental charting and restorative terms.
DA-150	Infection Control in Dentistry	This course will cover the process of disease transmission, methods and agents for sterilization and disinfection, universal precautions, and means of protection for the dental team and patient.
DA-151	Fundamentals of Chairside Assisting	This course introduces the student to patient and treatment room preparation, data collection, four-handed dentistry techniques common to all dental procedures, and recognition and management of medical emergencies.
DA-157	Dental Radiology	This course will cover radiation production, safety and protection, exposure and processing procedures, and quality assessment of radiographs. Lab emphasis placed on developing proficiency in intraoral exposure techniques. Additional lab hours required.
DA-159	Dental Office Procedures	An introduction to procedures associated with the business aspects of the dental office that include scheduling appointments, telephone and written correspondence, and records management.
DA-161	Dental Assisting Practicum	This course introduces the student to the dental office and provides an opportunity for the application of basic dental assisting skills and clinical support functions. Additional hours required.
DA-162	Dental Systems Management	An introduction to the use and application of dental office computer software for data entry and records management. The student will learn how to use dental software and will explore its utilization potential in the modern dental office.
DA-164	Clinical Applications I	Theoretical knowledge is applied in the clinical lab setting. Emphasis is on developing skill in assisting with restorative procedures and manipulating dental materials. Additional lab hours required.
DA-165	Dental Materials	This course presents the basic physical properties and technical aspects of materials used in restorative and laboratory procedures with emphasis on restorative materials, dental cements, gypsum products, and impression materials.
DA-166	Dental Lab Procedures	This course is a continued study of dental materials, focusing on those materials used in the fabrication of appliances and prostheses. Lab sessions give the student an opportunity to develop skill in manipulation of material and use of lab equipment. Additional lab hours required.
DA-167	Dental Radiology II	A study of the principles of extraoral radiography, variations in intraoral radiographic procedures, physical properties and biological effects of radiation, and the appearance of normal anatomical structures and pathological conditions.Corequisite: DA 174.
DA-168	Integrated Dental Sciences	A study of basic anatomy and physiology with emphasis on structures of the head, neck, and oral cavity. Dental anatomy, oral embryology and histology, oral pathology, and pharmacology are also covered in this course.
DA-169	Preventive Dental Health	A study of the principles of preventive dentistry in terms of oral health maintenance and nutrition. This course emphasizes the dental assistant's role in dental health teaching, patient motivation, and preventive intraoral procedures. 
DA-172	Dental Practice Management	A study of principles and procedures related to the daily operation and management of the dental office. Additional topics include resume preparation and interviewing skills, discussion of legal and ethical issues, and interpersonal work relations.
DA-173	Chairside Assisting: Dental Specialties	This course covers the scope and function of the dental specialties, as well as terminology, instrumentation, and treatment procedures unique to each specialty. Emphasis is placed on the assistant's role in chairside procedures and patient teaching.
DA-174	Clinical Applications II	The student continues to assimilate and apply theoretical knowledge through practice and demonstration of proficiency in the clinical lab setting. Emphasis on dental specialty procedures, dental health education, dental lab procedures, and special radiographic techniques.
DA-175	Dental Assisting Practicum II	A continuation of practical experience in the general or specialty dental office. The student will acquire new skills and increase proficiency in four handed dentistry techniques, lab procedures, and clinical support functions. Additional hours required.
DA-176	Dental Assisting Practicum III	The student will assume the role and responsibilities of the dental assistant as an integral member of the dental team during this final phase of clinical experience. Emphasis is placed on the application of theoretical knowledge and practical skills in performing advanced dental assisting procedures and clinical support functions. Additional hours required.
DA-201	Expanded Functions I	Techniques and concepts of restorative and preventive expanded function procedures delegated to dental  assistants in the state of Missouri as specified in the rules and regulations set forth in the Missouri Dental Practice Act. Procedures include placing restorations and dressings, sizing stainless steel crowns, and use of the air polisher. Additional lab hours required.
DA-202	Expanded Functions II	Techniques and concepts of prosthodontic expanded function procedure delegated to dental assistants in the state of Missouri as specified in the rules and regulations set forth in the Missouri Dental Practice Act. Procedures include  placing retraction cord, making impressions for fixed and removable prostheses, extra-oral adjustment of prostheses, cementation of permanent appliances or prostheses, and placement of temporary soft liners. Additional lab hours required.
DA-203	Expanded Functions III	Techniques and concepts of orthodontic expanded function procedures delegated to dental assistants in the state of Missouri as specified in the rules and regulations set forth in the Missouri Dental Practice Act. Procedures include  preliminary bending of archwires, placement and cementation of bands and brackets, removal of orthodontic bands and brackets, palliative care of orthodontic emergencies. Additional lab hours required.
DCS-104	American Sign Language I	This course is for students planning to pursue sign language studies in depth. Intensive exposure is given to American Sign Language (ASL), allowing development of beginning level communication skills used with Deaf persons. Comprehension of target language is emphasized. ASL linguistic and cultural features are presented in the context of learning experiences.
DCS-105	American Sign Language II	This course is for students planning to pursue sign language studies in depth. Intensive exposure is given to American Sign Language (ASL), allowing continued development of intermediate level communication skills used with Deaf persons. Comprehension of target language is emphasized. ASL linguistic and cultural features are presented in the context of language learning experiences. 
DCS-106	American Sign Language III	Continued exposure is given to ASL, allowing greater development of expressive and receptive ASL communication skills. Linguistic features of ASL and cultural features of the American Deaf community are presented in the context of language learning experiences.
DCS-107	Fingerspelling	This course develops expressive and receptive fingerspelling skills based on word and phrase recognition principles. Because a manual alphabet is used by deaf people, it is essential to develop communication skills in ASL or PSE.
DCS-108	Orientation to Interpreting	An overview of interpreting as an occupation. Topics include interpersonal skills, professional ethics, parameters of responsibility of the paraprofessional, examination of community resources, and legal ramifications.
DCS-109	Etymology for Interpreters	This course instructs students in the fundamentals of language building, interpreting, translating English idioms in the correct meaning, and identifying the variation of  verb versatility, multiple meanings, multiple signs, and contextual clues. Concentrated attention is given to English and sign vocabulary development. Students will learn discourse and comparative analysis techniques.
DCS-110	Deaf Theatre Studies	This course addresses the special considerations of sign language performance. Emphasis is placed on developing theatrical sign and mime skills. Lectures and field trips are included. The course is open to Deaf and non-Deaf students.
DCS-111	Theory of American Sign Language	A course to examine the structural and grammatical principles of ASL. An introductory study of the linguistic and semiotic problems of equivalency in English and American Sign Language will be studied. By incorporating linguistic information into the text analysis process, quality interpretation of English and ASL will result.
DCS-115	Introduction to Deaf Communications Studies	This course surveys the aspects of deafness by familiarizing students with the physiology of the ear, causes and types of hearing losses, social and psychological aspects of deafness, national and community organizations (i.e. NAD, RID), and history of deaf education.
DCS-116	American Sign Language Semantics	This course is designed to expand student's knowledge, recognition, and understanding of American Sign Language semantics and semantic units. Focus will be on interpreting and translating ASL idiomatic expressions into equivalent English meaning and usage; developing a recognition of cultural variations of sentence types, time, pronominalization, subjects and objects, classifiers, locatives, pluralization and temporal and distributional aspects. Emphasis will be on cross-cultural influences on language usage and thought.
DCS-118	Sign Seminar	This course is designed to provide increased interactive opportunities for students to continue development of their knowledge of vocabulary and grammatical features of ASL. Instructional approaches include discussion, expansion and explanation in the target language. In addition, the course focuses on colloquialisms, varying registers and socially restricted vocabulary in numerous contexts.
DCS-119	Theory of American Sign Language Lab	This course is designed to reinforce concepts taught in DCS 111 (Theory of American Sign Language) within individualized and small group settings. Additional hours required.
DCS-120	Fingerspelling Lab	This course is designed to reinforce concepts taught in DCS 107 (Fingerspelling) within individualized and small group settings. Additional hours required.
DCS-121	American Sign Language IV	This course provides continued and in-depth exposure to ASL allowing greater development of expressive and receptive ASL communication skill. Advanced linguistic and cultural features are presented in the context of language learning experiences.
DCS-206	Consecutive Interpreting	Introduces basic skills necessary for an individual to interpret ASL to English or English to ASL. The course is built around a sequencing of drills and incorporates video and deaf signers. The Code of Ethics is reinforced in the classroom.
DCS-207	Simultaneous Interpreting	Introduces basic skills necessary to simultaneously transliterate Contact/PSE to English or English to Contact/PSE. The course is built around sequencing of drills and exercises and incorporates videos and deaf signers. The Code of Ethics will be reinforced in context.
DCS-209	Interpreting/Transliterating Lab	Designed to reinforce concepts discussed in DCS 206/207 within individualized and small group settings. Concurrent enrollment in DCS 206 or DCS 207. Additional lab hours required.
DCS-210	Sign to Voice Interpreting	The purpose of this course is to provide the student an opportunity to build skills in interpreting and transliterating into spoken English from ASL and various contact varieties.
DCS-211	Specialized Interpreting	Various interpreting settings are explored, including educational, legal, medical, mental health, religious, platform, rehabilitation, and performing arts. The course also develops understanding of additional types of communication techniques, such as interpreting for those who are deaf-blind, oral or exhibit minimal language skills.
DCS-212	Deaf History and Culture	This course helps students understand historical values and traditions within the culture of Deaf people. Traditions include use of humor, success stories and behaviors of empowerment. Values include the importance of clubs, perspectives on education of Deaf children, interpreter services and the preservation of ASL.
DCS-213	Professional Issues and Ethics	This course will explore the current role of the interpreter as a professional. Topics will include, but not be limited to, the art of cross-cultural mediation, ethical standards, application of interpreting theories, resume development and business practices. This course will prepare students for the workplace learning experience.
DCS-214	Interactive Interpreting	This skill development course will provide students with the opportunity to practice skills associated with interactive interpreting situations. Students will use both consecutive and simultaneous interpreting methods. Interactive interpreting refers to the process of initiating an interpretation both manual and verbal during a variety of interview and one-on-one situations (mental health, medical, employment, educational and business). Students will begin working with isolated cognitive subtasks (critical listening, analyzing the information, constructing the interpretation and generating the interpretation) of interpretation and work to integrate component skills to perform an interactive interpretation.
DCS-215	Interpreter Seminar	This course is designed to provide increased interactive opportunities for students to continue the development of their knowledge of the interpreting process. Instructional approaches include discussion, expansion, and explanation of interpreting and transliterating. In addition, the course focuses on cross cultural mediation and discourse analysis.
DCS-216	Educational Interpreting - Classroom Applications	This course is designed to focus on the principles of interpreting within the framework of an educational system. Procedures and strategies for effective communication in the educational setting are discussed. The role of the educational interpreter to facilitate communication between Deaf individuals and their peers, educational instructors, staff and students is stressed. Also emphasized is the interpreter as a member of the educational team.
DCS-217	Translation Applications of ASL	This is a skill development course based on English written text analysis and American Sign Language equivalent meaning and appropriate interpretation with conceptual accuracy. Students will engage in the analysis, discussion and translation of ASL and/or English texts from one language into the other. Student demonstration of translations will be used to discuss meaning of message and degrees of equivalency. The discourse style of American English and Sign Language usage will be analyzed to distinguish the patterns of low and high context usage, linguistic structure and cultural differences.
DCS-218	Pre-Workplace Learning	This course will prepare students to enter the workplace learning experience. Topics will include  professional organizations, certification, contextual factors, market analysis, time management, business management, consumer attitudes and minority accommodations.
DCS-219	Workplace Learning: Deaf Communication Studies	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of interpreting to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum of 150 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
DHY-120	Concepts of Pre-Clinical Dental Hygiene I	Development of basic foundations for competent delivery of preventive, therapeutic and educational dental hygiene services to the public. Establish a solid knowledge base for assessment, planning, implementation and evaluation of patient care. Theory and practical aspects of prevention of disease transmission and pre-treatment patient evaluation are emphasized. Basic instrumentation design and technique for use are covered in depth. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-121	Clinical Applications Lab I	Application of introductory clinical assessment techniques. Theory and application of pit and fissure sealants. Proper positioning for the patient, operator, and dental unit for rendering effective patient treatment. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-125	Periodontics I	A study of the healthy periodontium and an introduction to gingival conditions and diseases. Acquired soft and hard deposits as well as the microbiology of periodontal diseases are covered in depth. Methods of basic oral physiotherapy are introduced.
DHY-126	Dental Radiology I	A study of the production and effects of radiation. Emphasis is given to the effects of variations in exposure control factors, personnel and patient safety measures, and dental radiographic film and film processing. Anatomical landmarks, and their radiographic presentation are introduced. Techniques for placing, positioning, exposing, processing and mounting intraoral radiographs are covered in depth. Additional lab hours required. 
DHY-127	Oral Anatomy	Introductory study of the teeth, as well as intraoral and perioral structures. Anatomical features of the teeth and oral cavity are covered in depth. Processes and techniques for constructing dental chartings and dentition findings documentations are detailed. The dental caries process is introduced. Rationales and techniques for the use of pit and fissure sealants, as a supportive primary preventive procedure, are presented.
DHY-128	Biomedical Sciences for the Dental Hygienist	This course is designed to acquaint the dental hygiene student with the basic concepts of pathophysiology. It will deal with selected conditions of the cardiovascular, respiratory, immune, nervous and endocrine systems. Emphasis is on the relationship between these conditions and potential actions and treatment modifications in the dental health care setting.
DHY-129	Dental-Medical Emergencies	Survey of defects/medical problems that have dental management implications and/or possible medical emergency sequelea. Prompt, accurate and ethical emergency prevention, preparation and management techniques are detailed with related legal implications.
DHY-130	Concepts of Clinical Dental Hygiene II	Techniques for the assessment of medical status and dental conditions as a basis for the dental hygiene diagnosis, and learning theory as a basis for patient education, are covered. Fluoride, as an individual and a community primary preventive measure, is emphasized. Extrinsic stain removal principles are included.
DHY-131	Clinical Applications Lab II	Application of clinical assessment techniques and caries prevention agents, and instrument care and maintenance. Theory and application of periodontal probe instrumentation, and prostheses and appliances care and maintenance. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-132	Clinical Dental Hygiene II	Patient contact is established and coordinates with application of the theories, principles, and responsibilities related to dental hygiene practice at the student's current level of knowledge. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-136	Dental Nutrition and Biochemistry	This course is designed to acquaint the student with the concepts of biochemistry and cell metabolism, especially those which are required for a clear understanding of nutrition. Major topics of the course include energy balance and the chemistry, digestion, and metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates and fats. Emphasis is on the importance and function of nutrients for health and disease prevention and the relation of nutrition and oral health.
DHY-137	Anatomy and Embryology of the Head and Neck	This course covers the gross morphology and embryology of the structures of the head and neck. Lectures in embryology emphasize development of the face and oral structures. Lectures on gross morphology emphasize the cranial nerves (especially the trigeminal and facial), the muscles of mastication and facial expression, and the blood and lymphatic vessels of the head and neck.
DHY-138	General and Oral Pathology	An introduction to general pathology with emphasis on oral pathosis. Oral diseases and oral manifestations of systemic diseases are studied in depth.
DHY-142	Clinical Dental Hygiene Summer	Students continue to apply the learned theories, principles and responsibilities related to the field of dental hygiene practice in the dental hygiene clinic. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-159	Dental Medical Emergencies	Dental Medical Emergencies introduces elements of dental care as it relates to risk management of medically compromised patients. The major portion of the course deals with the prevention, recognition, and management of medical emergencies which occur in the dental office.
DHY-172	Clinical Dental Hygiene: Summer Clinic	In Clinical Dental Hygiene: Summer Clinic, students continue to apply the learned theories, principles, procedures, instrumentation and responsibilities related to the field of dental hygiene practice in the dental hygiene clinic. Additional hours required.
DHY-215	Pain Control	Theory and clinical applications of pain control interventions appropriate for use within the context of dental hygiene care delivery. The psychology, physiology, and pharmacology of pain control are covered, with emphasis on the prevention, recognition and management of adverse reactions. Interventions within the legal scope of dental hygiene practice in Missouri are the focus of this course. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-220	Concepts of Clinical Dental Hygiene III	Introduction of additional clinical dental hygiene procedures including advanced periodontal instrumentation and skills to further develop the assessment and implementation of the dental hygiene diagnosis and treatment plan. Theories and principles for the use of power scalers, air polishers, pulp vitality testers, cast and models, tooth bleaching, and tray fabrication and use of the intraoral camera are covered.  Research assignments for review of the current literature will continue.
DHY-221	Clinical Applications Lab III	Application of clinical dental hygiene concepts learned in Clinical Dental Hygiene III. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-222	Clinical Dental Hygiene III	Students continue to apply the learned theories, principles and responsibilities related to the field of dental hygiene practice in the dental hygiene clinic and at community dental health facilities. Additional dental hygiene modalities will be implemented into patient treatment care. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-223	Community Public Health	This course is designed to provide a study of the history, economics, and management of the public health organization, its delivery, and supportive services. Included are the assessment and control of dental disease through dental personnel roles in schools, industry, civic, and public organizations. Emphasis is placed on examinations of the principles of public health, epidemiological methods of investigation, the US health care system, basic concepts in research and biostatistics and community based program planning. Introduction to techniques for evaluating dental/dental hygiene literature is established.
DHY-225	Periodontics II	Advanced study of the periodontium in disease. Periodontitis, and its various presentations, is covered in depth, with emphasis on assessment methods and dental hygiene interventions. Basic surgical concepts are introduced.
DHY-226	Dental Radiology II	Advanced study of supplemental dental radiographic techniques and procedures used in contemporary dental practices and facilities. Emphasis is given to extraoral and digital radiography techniques. Supplemental procedures for edentulous and pediatric dental patients are presented. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-228	Dental Pharmacology	A study of pharmaceutical classifications, properties and effects. Emphasis is given to the systemic effects of drugs and their dental implications in the management of various medical conditions.
DHY-230	Transition into Professional Dental Hygiene Practice	Dental hygiene care for cancer patients, dental implants and suspected cases of child abuse are introduced. The health care provider-patient legal relationship and state rules and regulations for the practice of dentistry and dental hygiene are emphasized. Employment-seeking skills are covered. This course includes a community service practicum learning component. Additional hours required.
DHY-232	Clinical Dental Hygiene IV	Patient care continues and coordinates with the application of the theories, principles, and responsibilities related to dental hygiene practice in the dental clinic and at off-campus community rotation sites. Students will also complete a community service practicum field experience as a component of this course. Additional lab hours required.
DHY-251	Concepts in Clinical Dental Hygiene III: Lab	Concepts in Clinical Dental Hygiene III: Lab involves the application of clinical dental hygiene concepts and various dental materials learned in Concepts of Clinical Dental Hygiene III and Dental Materials. Additional hours required.
DHY-252	Clinical Dental Hygiene III	Clinical Dental Hygiene III continues with students applying the learned theories, principles and responsibilities related to the field of dental hygiene practice in the dental hygiene clinic and at community dental health facilities. Additional dental hygiene modalities will be implemented into patient treatment care. Additional hours required.
DHY-257	Dental Materials	Dental Materials introduces the student to the physical properties and procedures for using various dental materials. Students are instructed in the use of impression material, steps in constructing study casts, formulating restorative materials and replacing or protecting structures within the oral cavity. The clinical application and use of these materials will take place in DHY 251 Concepts of Clinical Dental Hygiene Lab.
DHY-259	Dental Nutrition & Biochemistry	Dental Nutrition & Biochemistry introduces the concepts of biochemistry required for a clear understanding of nutrition. Major topics of the course include energy balance and the chemistry, digestion and metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates and fats. Emphasis is on the importance and function of nutrients for health and disease prevention and the relationship of nutrition to oral health.
DIE-101	Diesel Engine Operation and Repair	This course examines through practical application the theories of operation, construction, maintenance, disassembly, and assembly of the diesel engine and its supporting systems; including lubrication system, cooling system, and engine brakes. Additional lab hours required. 
DIE-102	Medium/Heavy Truck Suspension and Steering	This course examines through practical application the types of suspension and steering systems found on medium and heavy trucks. Emphasis will be in areas of manual steering gears and columns, power steering gears, suspension system components, wheel alignment diagnosis, and wheel & tire diagnosis and repair. Additional lab hours required.
DIE-103	Medium/Heavy Truck Electricity	This course examines through practical application the theories of basic electricity and the diagnostic equipment used to perform general electrical system diagnosis of medium and heavy truck batteries, starting systems, charging systems, and lighting systems. Additional lab hours required.
DIE-104	Electronic Information Systems and Manuals	This course will introduce the student to current repair and information systems for trucks. Emphasis will be on computer based systems and on interpreting specifications in both metric and English systems of measurement.
DIE-105	Diesel Fuel Systems	This course examines through practical application the theories of operation, construction, maintenance, and service of diesel engine fuel systems including; air induction and exhaust systems, mechanical fuel injection systems, and electronic fuel injection systems. Additional lab hours required.
DIE-106	Medium/Heavy Truck Brakes	This course examines through practical application the types of brake systems found on medium and heavy trucks. Emphasis will be in areas of air brakes, foundation brakes, parking brakes, anti-lock brakes, and power brakes. Additional lab hours required.
DIE-107	Medium/Heavy Truck Electronics	This course examines through practical application the theories of electronics and diagnostic equipment used to perform general electronic system diagnosis and repair of medium and heavy truck gauge and warning devices, electronic fuel injection, anti-lock brakes, and electrical accessories. Additional lab hours required.
DIE-201	Preventive Maintenance Inspection	This course examines through practical application the areas of inspection and maintenance on medium and heavy trucks. To include; engine, fuel system, cooling system, lubrication system, cab and hood, electrical, drive train, brakes, and tires and wheels. Additional lab hours required.
DIE-202	Co-op Work Experience I-Diesel Technology	A cooperative education work experience at a local truck or bus repair facility which allows students to apply skills learned in diesel technology courses. Students will also learn new skills and explore employment possibilities while supervised by employer and by a faculty member. Additional hours required.
DIE-203	Truck Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning	This course examines through practical application the types of air conditioning, heating, and ventilation systems found on medium and heavy trucks. Emphasis will be in the areas of system diagnosis, component repair, and refrigerant recovery, recycling, and handling. Additional lab hours required.
DIE-204	Service and Parts Management	This course will introduce the student to current management practices of parts and service departments in modern truck repair shops. Shop tools, equipment, and safety will also be emphasized.
DIE-205	Co-op Work Experience II - Diesel Technology	Continuation of DIE 202. Additional hours required.
DIE-206	Medium/Heavy Truck Drivetrains	This course examines through practical application the types of manual and automatic transmission drivetrains found on medium and heavy trucks. To include  clutches, drive shaft and universal joints, and drive axles. Additional lab hours required.
DIT-104	Clinical Nutrition	Study of the roles of dietetics professionals in the nutrition care process, focusing on patient interviewing and counseling, conducting nutritional assessments, nutrition support and documentation in medical records. Dietary modifications for calorie and nutrient control, and various disease states, such as diabetes, cancer, cardiovascular disease and AIDS will be studied.
DIT-106	Food Management Practicum	This course provides students the opportunity to obtain experience in food service departments of designated food service facilities. Assigned experiences are designed to complement and reinforce the corresponding lecture courses.
DIT-107	Clinical Nutrition Practicum	Experience in patient care areas of designated health care facilities. Assigned experiences are designed to complement and reinforce the knowledge gained in the corresponding lecture courses. Additional hours required.
DIT-108	Food: Preparation and Science Lecture	This course explores the basic principles of food science, preparation and selection. Recognition and evaluation of standard products, function of ingredients, and the link of food service to nutrition and health will be emphasized. Discussions and demonstrations will focus on the nutrient content of food and principles of food science and preparation for nutrient retention and quality.
DIT-109	Food: Preparation and Science Lab	Food science principles will be reinforced and applied in lab experiments and recipe production. The scientific method will be used in the exploration of food science and food preparation methods. Experiments and preparation will focus on nutrient retention and high quality products. Material from Food  Preparation/Science Lecture course will be reinforced. Additional lab hours required.
DIT-115	Principles of Nutrition	This is an introductory nutrition class that relates to individual and family health. Topics include the functions and sources of food nutrients, how the body handles foods through digestion, absorption and metabolism, and planning health diets for a variety of people. Appropriate methods of weight control, sports nutrition, and eating disorders will be covered, as well as an overview of nutrition throughout the life cycle, food safety, and ethnic influences on the American diet.
DIT-202	Medical Nutrition Therapy	Study of the pathophysiology of selected disease states, the evaluation of nutrition status and appropriate nutrition intervention during various disease processes. Emphasizes the application of clinical nutrition skills, including counseling clients, interpretation of laboratory values, taking vital signs and documentation in the medical record.
DIT-207	Quantity Foods	Students will apply food preparation and management skills to a quantity food production system. Food preparation, sensory evaluation, menu planning, recipe development and expansion, food production and procurement, personnel management, sanitation, quality improvement, equipment, food cost calculation/control, and marketing techniques are emphasized. Facility design and financial management are discussed. Additional lab hours required.
DIT-208	Food Systems Management Practicum	Practical application of management concepts and tools. Provides an opportunity to observe and participate in food service management situations and use management tools, especially those related to budget and personnel administration. Additional hours required.
DIT-209	Community Nutrition Practicum	Advanced nutrition practicum, with emphasis on staff performance. Students will function as staff members in patient care or community education settings. Additional hours required.
DIT-210	Community Nutrition	Study of the roles and resources of community/public health nutrition professionals promoting wellness in the community. Assessment of community nutritional needs, and planning, implementing and evaluating nutrition education programs for various age groups under different socio-economic conditions. The legislative process, health care insurance industry, and domestic food assistance programs will also be covered.
DIT-214	Nutrition Through the Life Cycle	A study of every stage of the life cycle, normal growth and development, common nutritional deficiencies, and nutrient needs, including the impact of lifestyles, culture, economics and values of nutritional intake. Basic assessment and practical methods of delivering nutrition education are also addressed.
DIT-225	The Cultural Feast: An Introduction to Food and Society	This course will examine, through the common ground of food, how cultural influences mold society. A central goal of the course-to broaden students' horizons and to make them aware of their own ethnocentric assumptions - will be accomplished through experiencing different foods and customs and through discussing cultural practices and values.
DMS-103	Ultrasound Physics and Instrumentation I	Topics covered in this course include basic physical principles of ultrasound, Doppler principles and ultrasound equipment controls. Emphasis will be placed on control manipulation and parameters required for optimum sonographic examinations.
DMS-104	Ultrasound Physics and Instrumentation II	Ultrasound Physics and Instrumentation II addresses transducer parameters, principles of ultrasound instruments and modes of operation, principles of Doppler techniques, methods of Doppler flow analysis and acoustical artifacts.
DMS-105	Medical Sonography I	This course will present normal sectional anatomy and patterns for the most common examinations within abdominal and OB/GYN sonography. An introduction to clinical applications will include the pathophysiologic basis, clinical signs and symptoms and typical sonographic patterns related to the most common abnormalities encountered in the clinical environment.
DMS-106	Medical Sonography Scanning Techniques I	Medical Sonography Scanning Techniques I addresses laboratory demonstrations and student performance of standard protocols for the most common abdominal, obstetric and gynecologic sonographic examinations, with emphasis on normal anatomy and pattern recognition. Additional lab hours required.
DMS-107	Medical Sonography Practicum I	Observation and initial scanning experience of abdominal, obstetrical and gynecologic sonographic examinations. Additional hours required.
DMS-108	Medical Sonography II	Further study of the clinical applications of abdominal, obstetric and gynecologic sonography. Lecture topics include the pathologic basis, clinical signs and symptoms, related diagnostic procedures and typical sonographic patterns of common and rare conditions and abnormalities encountered in the clinical setting.
DMS-109	Medical Sonography Scanning Techniques II	Laboratory demonstration and student performance of standard protocols for superficial structures and less common procedures within abdominal and OB/GYN sonography, with emphasis on normal anatomy and pattern recognition. Additional lab hours required.
DMS-110	Medical Sonography Clinical Applications	Medical Sonography Clinical Applications incorporates a review of abnormal abdominal sonographic examinations in order to further develop the critical thinking skills required to correlate the clinical history, clinical signs and symptoms and results of other diagnostic tests with the results of the sonographic examination.
DMS-111	Medical Sonography Practicum II	Clinical performance of abdominal, obstetric and gynecologic sonographic examinations under the supervision of experienced sonographers. Additional hours required.
DMS-112	Cardiac Sonography I	This course will present normal sectional anatomy, hemodynamics, patient assessment and diagnostic testing related to cardiac sonography. An introduction to clinical applications will include the pathophysiologic basis, clinical signs and symptoms and typical findings related to the most common types of adult cardiac disease.
DMS-113	Cardiac Sonography Scanning Techniques I	Cardiac Sonography Scanning Techniques I addresses laboratory demonstrations and student performance of standard protocols for transthoracic adult cardiac sonographic examinations, with emphasis on normal 2-D, M-Mode and Doppler pattern recognition. Additional lab hours required.
DMS-114	Cardiac Sonography Practicum I	Observation and initial scanning experience of transthoracic adult cardiac sonographic examinations. Additional hours required.
DMS-115	Cardiac Sonography II	Presentation of the clinical applications of cardiac sonography including the pathophysiologic basis, clinical signs and symptoms and typical findings related to acquired and congenital adult cardiac disease.
DMS-116	Cardiac Sonography Scanning Techniques II	Laboratory demonstration and performance of pulsed and continuous wave Doppler examinations and less common protocols in cardiac sonography including stress echo and the use of contrast agents. Additional lab hours required.
DMS-117	Cardiac Sonography Clinical Applications	Cardiac Sonography Clinical Applications incorporates a review of abnormal cardiac sonographic examinations in order to further develop the critical thinking skills required to correlate the clinical history, clinical signs and symptoms and results of other diagnostic tests with the results of the sonographic examination.	
DMS-118	Cardiac Sonography Practicum II	Clinical performance of transthoracic adult cardiac sonographic examinations under the supervision of experienced sonographers. Additional hours required.
DMS-201	Ultrasound Physics and Instrumentation III	Topics in this course include quality assurance procedures, biological effects, 3-D ultrasound applications and a general review in preparation for the certification examinations in physics and instrumentation.
DMS-202	Medical Sonography III	A study of the clinical applications of superficial structures, including the pathophysiologic basis, clinical signs and symptoms, related diagnostic tests and typical sonographic patterns of common and rare conditions encountered in the clinical setting. Additional hours required.
DMS-203	Medical Sonography Practicum III	A continuation of clinical experience achievement of minimal competency in the most common examinations. Additional hours required.
DMS-204	Medical Sonography IV	This course will present normal sectional anatomy and patterns, and the clinical applications for neonatal neurosonography and the pediatric abdomen and pelvis. The remainder of the course will consist of review in preparation for the certification examinations in Abdomen and OB/GYN sonography.
DMS-206	Medical Sonography Practicum IV	Students will complete all clinical competency requirements for the specialties of abdomen, OB/GYN and superficial structures. Additional hours required.
DMS-207	Cardiac Sonography III	Further study of the clinical applications of cardiac sonography including pediatric applications and other advanced and/or rare imaging techniques. Additional hours required.
DMS-208	Cardiac Sonography Practicum III	A continuation of clinical experience with achievement of minimal competency in the most common types of examinations. Additional hours required.
DMS-209	Cardiac Sonography IV	Further study of the clinical applications of cardiac sonography, including fetal echocardiography. The remainder of the course will consist of review in preparation for the certification examination in cardiac sonography.
DMS-211	Cardiac Sonography Practicum IV	Students will complete all clinical competency requirements for adult cardiac sonography. Additional hours required.
ECE-101	Introduction to Early Care and Education	An overview of early childhood programs and curricula, history, trends, and career opportunities are introduced. Quality characteristics of the environment and the role of the professional are examined.  Five clock hours (minimum) of observation of children in various settings is required.
ECE-102	Creative Experiences in Early Care and Education	This course introduces the expressive philosophy of creativity. Students explore materials and tools useful in creative expression across the curriculum.
ECE-103	Language and Literacy in Early Care and Education	Students examine quality literature appropriate for children from infancy through age eight. Appropriate literacy experiences of reading, writing, and language are practiced. Students also examine methods of presentation and the creation of literature-based settings.
ECE-104	Principles of Early Care and Education	This course focuses on the methodology for establishing developmentally appropriate care and education for young children. Topics include, designing appropriate physical environments, play development and facilitation, tailoring curriculum planning toward individual needs and interests of children, and classroom management styles.
ECE-105	Child Development Laboratory	Students will actively participate in the daily operation of a quality early care and education setting for 6 hours each week, plus additional seminar meetings.  A faculty supervisor will guide students through selecting, planning, and organizing curriculum in developmentally appropriate ways. Students will design learning experiences for young children.
ECE-107	Early Care and Special Education	Students will be introduced to the field of early care and special education with a focus on intervention and the role of the teacher.  The course includes screening, assessment, and working with families. Five clock hours (minimum) of observation and field study is required.
ECE-108	Infant, Toddler and Two-Year-Old Children	This course is a study of the development of infants, toddlers, and two-year-olds. It includes current theories of development and a variety of caregiving practices for both the early care practitioner and parent.  Students will observe and participate in an infant, toddler, or two-year-old setting a minimum of 10 hours during the semester.
ECE-124	Child Nutrition, Health and Safety	This course will focus on health, nutrition and safety issues in early care and education. Topics will include nutrition and nutrition education, menu planning, indoor and outdoor safety, childhood diseases and injuries and appropriate health and hygiene practices for caregivers, as well as for children.
ECE-125	Child Growth and Development I	Students will study human development from conception to age eight, including physical and motor, cognitive, language, social and emotional development. There is an emphasis on the interrelationship of growth and behavior in young children.  Eight clock hours (minimum) of observation is required.
ECE-127	Family and Teacher Interactions	Students will examine strategies and develop skills in effective communication with individual parents and families. Reflections on the contemporary American family, developing partnerships, utilizing community resources, parent education meetings, and home visiting will be included.
ECE-200	Guiding Young Children	A practical study of child guidance literature that includes normative development, theory, and strategies for guiding children's behavior at home and in diverse settings. Observation and field study of children from infancy through age eight will be the foundation of this course. A minimum of eight clock hours of observation will be required.
ECE-201	Math and Science in Early Care and Education	Students will design and implement developmentally appropriate experiences that enhance math and science concepts for children birth to age eight. Various cognitive theories and stages of development are integrated throughout the course. Topics include implementation strategies, sensory awareness, problem solving, thinking and questioning skills, exploration and discovery learning.
ECE-202	Movement and Music in Early Care and Education	The student will explore movement and music as it relates to the development and interests of young children. Students will prepare appropriate experiences in gross motor, fine motor, perceptual motor and auditory perception, targeted toward young children in diverse populations and settings.
ECE-203	Early Care and Education Practicum I	The student will continue practice in developmentally appropriate lesson planning, leading individual and group experiences, utilizing observation and reflection techniques, and demonstrating the ability to guide young children in positive ways. The student will participate in an early childhood setting for 9 hours each week, with additional seminar meetings.
ECE-204	Management of Early Care and Education Settings	This course focuses on the organizational and managerial structure of various center and home-based settings. Topics include licensing and accreditation standards, spatial design, fiscal responsibilities, employment procedures, staff development, marketing, and the planning and evaluation of center operations.
ECE-205	Child and Society	This course is an introduction to the sociology of child development, emphasizing the role of the family, school, and community in the socialization process. The effect of culture and political forces upon the delivery of appropriate early care and education is discussed, as well as available community resources for a diverse society.
ECE-206	Early Care and Education Practicum II	The student will demonstrate the ability to execute all teaching and caregiving aspects of the assigned early childhood setting. Planning, implementation, developmentally appropriate guidance methods, as well as professional job searching preparation is included. The student will participate in an early childhood setting for nine hours each week, with additional seminar meetings.
ECE-207	Activities for Special Individuals	Covers practical techniques for working with exceptional individuals including task analysis and behavior modification. Experience with screening instruments and charting behavior as part of developing and implementing individualized programs will be emphasized.
ECE-208	Before and After School Care	This course focuses upon the development expectations and unique needs of the five through twelve-year-old in before and after school settings and summer programs. Legal issues, community resources, personnel relationships, nutrition and health concerns, communication with families, administrative procedures, and curriculum are discussed.
ECO-140	Introduction to Economics	This course is a study of basic economic concepts, institutions, and policies, (both macroeconomic and microeconomic) necessary for a general understanding of the economy. Students who intend to transfer to a business administration program should take the two-course undergraduate sequences in Economics, ECO 151 and ECO 152 instead of ECO 140.
ECO-151	Principles of Macroeconomics	This course presents an introductory description and analysis of economics from a national perspective. Included are the basic concepts relating to the demand and supply model, macroeconomic data, trends and fluctuations in macroeconomic variables, simple models of the macroeconomy, fiscal and monetary policy, and economic growth.
ECO-152	Principles of Microeconomics	This introductory microeconomics course develops tools and models to explore the behavior of individuals and firms. The course develops the demand and supply model to examine outcomes in both output and input markets explores market failures, compares behaviors in competitive and noncompetitive markets, examines the economic concept of cost, and uses comparative advantage to explain both local and international trade.
EDU-120	Art for Children	The course will acquaint the student with art media and methods appropriate for children. The student will develop projects to promote the child's appreciation of art and to integrate art into the total curriculum.
EDU-210	Teaching Profession with Field Experience	Teaching Profession with Field Experience includes an introductory, minimum 36 hours of school field experience in accredited P-12 classrooms that provide opportunities to observe and contribute to teaching and learning.  This course allows preservice teachers to connect firsthand school experience with an emerging professional knowledge base.  The course develops professional knowledge of diverse educational settings through observation, instruction, experience, and reflection.  This course is designed to assist students in determining if a career in teaching is an appropriate goal.  Requirements for teacher preparation and certification are reviewed. 
EDU-211	Foundations of Education in a Diverse Society	Foundations of Education in a Diverse Society is designed to examine education practice from diverse historical, philosophical, sociological, economic, and legal perspectives.  The course will address issues of educational equity, sociocultural influences on teaching and learning, and how teachers and schools can contribute to interpersonal and intercultural understanding and respect, social justice, and democratic citizenship.  Students will explore the nature of school environments, the fundamental goals of education in the American public school, English Language Learners, the relationship between school and a diverse society, the organization of school curricula, and characteristics of effective schools and instruction in grades P-12. 
EDU-218	Educational Technology	Educational Technology students will learn how to integrate instructional technology into P-12 classrooms.  Students will study a variety of software programs, presentation technology, telecommunication tools, and assistive technology.  The focus will also be on social, ethical, legal, and human issues surrounding the use of technology. 
EDU-219	Education of Exceptional Learners	Education of Exceptional Learners is an introduction to exceptional learners and their education in grades P-12. Students will gain a comprehensive understanding of the characteristics of people with special needs in addition to strategies of educating and including all learners in general education and special education settings. Students will research and discuss complex issues related to compliance with state and federal education laws, such as the Individuals with Disabilities Educational Act (IDEA) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) as well learn to navigate special education processes, such as referral, eligibility, re-evaluation, and IEPs. This course requires a 15-hour special education field experience component.	
EDU-226	Children's Literature	This course will familiarize students with examples of good children's books, for children from infancy to adolescence. It will also help students develop the ability to evaluate a book, analyze its appeal, and present it effectively. (Same course as ENG 226.)
EDU-227	Educational Psychology	Educational Psychology is designed to help students relate theories and principles of educational psychology to teaching, learning, and assessment.  This course focuses on the diversity of learners and learning processes, as well as teacher characteristics, classroom strategies, and data analysis in P-12 classrooms.  Appropriate strategies for increasing motivation, multi-dimensional development, and academic achievement for all learners are introduced. 
EDU-228	Multicultural Education	Multicultural Education is designed to examine the multicultural context of education and prepare students to understand and teach learners from diverse backgrounds, with diverse characteristics, and with differing social identities. The course will address issues of educational equity, sociocultural influences on teaching and learning, and how teachers and schools can contribute to interpersonal and intercultural understanding and respect, social justice, and democratic citizenship.
EE-106	IBM Personal Computer Installation and Repair	This course will help you learn how to install and repair the popular IBM series of personal computers. Connection and setup of monitors, printers, hard disks, and memory will be covered. Some previous electronics or computer experience is recommended but not required.
EE-109	Personal Computer Configuration	This course is designed to teach the student to configure the IBM-compatible personal computer for optimum performance. Emphasis will be placed on the interaction between peripheral equipment and applications. Prior experience with personal computers and DOS is highly recommended. Additional hours required.
EE-110	Technical Electric Circuits I	This combination classroom and laboratory course is a study of the basics of electricity and electrical circuits. It includes such fundamentals as static electricity, resistance, Ohm's Law, Kirchoff's Laws, power, series and parallel circuits, voltage dividers, magnetism and electromagnetic induction as well as an introduction to generators. Additional lab hours required.
EE-111	Technical Electric Circuits II	This course is the continuation of EE 110. The basic meter types as to construction and operation are first studied. The concepts of alternating current as to frequency, period, amplitude wave length, phase relationship, maximum instantaneous, average and peak values are then considered. Inductance, capacitance and reactance are then studied from simple parallel or series circuits to complex circuits. Transformers, power and resources are also included. Additional lab hours required.
EE-112	Technical Electronics I	The basic principles of electronics will be introduced in this course. Semi-conductor theory with emphasis on diodes and transistors. The diode and bipolar devices will be studied in their applications to rectifiers, small signal amplifiers and power amplifiers. Additional lab hours required. 
EE-121	Fundamentals of Digital Electronics	This course is an introduction to Digital Electronics. Students will learn basic lab safety, electron theory, Ohm's and Kirchoff's Laws, logic, number systems, binary addition and Boolean Expression applications. Students will design, construct, troubleshoot and evaluate design problems, and will present oral reports of their results. Students will also study PLDs, Flip-Flops, microprocessors, and shift registers and counters.
EE-130	Electric Circuits I	This course emphasizes basic DC circuit configurations, components, and calculations. Content continues with introductory AC circuits and calculations, oscilloscope overview, and transformers. Laboratory experiments reinforce topics. Troubleshooting concepts are addressed along with the theory content. Additional lab hours required.
EE-131	Electric Circuits II	This course emphasizes AC circuit components, configurations, and characteristics. Content includes circuit theorems, AC quantities and calculations, component characteristics, circuit analysis and applications. Hands-on laboratory experiments coincide with classroom topics. Troubleshooting concepts will be continually addressed along with the theory content. Additional lab hours required. 
EE-132	Electronic Devices	This course introduces theory, characteristics and applications of most of the basic electronic devices used in industry. Basic practical circuits will be presented to reinforce the theory. Additional lab hours required.
EE-133	Electrical/Electronic Bridge	This course covers single and three phase electrical power connections, electronics, DC and AC circuitry, and basic operational amplifiers, with a special emphasis on application to medical devices. Safety aspects of power circuits and electrostatic discharge (ESD) will also be covered, as well as lab exercises utilizing test equipment and simulator circuits. Additional lab hours required.
EE-204	Three-Phase Power	This course includes a study of single-phase and three-phase systems and transformer theory. Practical applications of single-phase and three-phase loads are also covered. The circuit concepts of wye and delta connections will be discussed using the two-wattmeter and three-wattmeter methods of measuring power, emphasizing analysis of circuit concepts.
EE-230	Analog and Digital Electronics	A study of the operational amplifier as a scanner and integrator. The "bootstrap method" of analog computer patching. Digital fundamentals include number systems, Boolean algebra, logic circuits, memory devices, binary elements and input/output devices.  Additional lab hours required.
EE-233	Digital Logic	Digital computer fundamentals from the systems and circuit approach and an introduction to the basic theory of analog computers. Additional lab hours required.
EE-235	Electronic Communications	The fundamental theory and application of communications circuits and devices. The study of radar fundamentals, transmission lines, and electromagnetic interference will be included. Additional lab hours required.
EE-236	PLC/Programmable Logic Controller	This course presents the fundamentals of ladder logic (formerly relay logic) used in modern industrial controllers. Basic elements such as timers, counters, and sequencers are studied, as well as traditional methods of applying them to machine control. Students will program and perform laboratory experiments with programmable logic controllers, using the Allen Bradley SLC 500 family and the Micrologic series, with an introduction to control logic. Additional lab hours required.
EE-241	Transmission and Distribution of Power	This course is a general study of the sources of energy, types of generating stations, their comparative merits, transmission and distribution systems. Topics on transmission and distribution include types of construction, terminal facilities, equipment and protection against faults. Over-all system behavior, stability and industrial utilization of electrical energy are included. Attention is also given to the consideration of electric utility economics.
EE-242	Introduction to Microprocessors	This course will focus on the structure of a microcomputer input/output central processor and control units, memory programming techniques, logic circuits and arithmetic operations. Additional lab hours required.
EE-260	Electronic Project Design and Fabrication	This course provides techniques in safety precautions, use of laboratory equipment and component familiarization. Students receive experience in soldering techniques, chassis fabrication such as bending, drilling and punching, wiring, harnessing, and general shop practice. This course also provides the student with specialized training in printed circuit board layout and production procedures. Students are required to select a project which must be assembled on PCB, tested for proper operation, and mounted in an appropriate housing. Students must submit the completed project with documentation of the fabrication procedures for final grade assignment. Additional lab hours required.
EGR-050	Fundamentals of Drafting	First course in drafting for persons with little or no previous drafting coursework. Practice of using drafting tools, board skills, good line work, lettering, geometric construction, accurate layout of multiview and pictorial drawings and basic dimensioning will be emphasized. Additional lab hours required.	
EGR-100	Engineering Drawing	This course uses a combination of instruments and CAD systems for making drawings. The course includes use of instruments, lettering, geometrical constructions, technical sketching, principles of orthographic projection, pictorial drawing, descriptive geometry, sectional views and conventions, auxiliary views and dimensioning. Additional lab hours required.
EGR-104	Electronic Drafting	Review of basic drafting with emphasis on technical sketching and lettering. Topics include schematic diagrams, block diagrams, electronic symbols, etched circuit layout, wiring diagrams, mechanical and electronic detail and assembly drawings. Additional lab hours required.
EGR-133	Introduction to AutoCAD I	Fundamentals of the AutoCAD drafting system. Drawing setup  units, limits, layers, linetypes, colors. Drawing procedures  points, lines, arcs, circles. Special features  polylines, blocks, dimensioning, cross-hatching, plotting.
EGR-139	3-D AutoCAD with Autoshade	3-D drawing concepts using AutoCAD Version 10, generation of objects using true 3 dimensional database. User coordinate system, X,Y,Z coordinate system and x,y,z point filters. Extensive practice with various 3-D surfaces. Use of vpoint and dview commands to select viewing angle or perspective view. Settings lights, camera, and scenes to generate shaded images and movies.
EGR-141	Introduction to AutoCAD II	Continuation of Introduction to AutoCAD 1. DOS for AutoCAD, Blocks, attributes, symbol libraries, bill of material extraction, screen and tablet menus, digitizing drawings, slides and slide shows, introduction to LISP language.
EGR-145	Computer Solids Modeling	Students will learn to design and model objects using three dimensional solids modeling computer software. Extrusion, revolution, and sweeping are examples of techniques that will be studied. Students will model individual parts and assemblies of parts. The projection of working drawings and shaded pictorials will also be completed. Additional hours required.
EGR-147	Introduction to Engineering Design	This course is an introduction to the elements of Engineering Design. Students will learn the history of design, design process, sketching and visualization, geometric relationships, and modeling. Elements of manufacturing production, marketing, analysis, and quality control will also be studied. Students will learn presentation techniques and develop a portfolio.	
EGR-148	Solid Modeling with Unigraphics	This course teaches the use of 3-D modeling using the Unigraphics CAD package. Students will productively develop solid models, detail drawings and product assemblies. The class introduces assembly modeling in the context of a real-life scenario that includes parts modeled by the student as well as existing part models.
EGR-255	Advanced Computer Aided Drafting	This course addresses 2-D and 3-D drawing concepts, customizing menus, creating macros, symbol libraries, bill of material extraction, creating production drawings, modeling and shading. Additional hours required.
EGR-256	Solid Modeling with CATIA	This course is designed for students with 3-D modeling experience to learn the use of 3-D solid modeling using the CATIA CAD package. The student will productively develop solid models, detail drawings and product assemblies. Additional hours required.
EMT-119	EMT Emergency Medical Skills	EMT Emergency Medical Skills provides the student with hands-on instruction in the skills necessary to function as an EMT, such as patient assessment, airway maintenance, CPR, and stabilization of injuries. Additional hours required.
EMT-121	Emergency Care, Principles, and Techniques	Emergency Care, Principles, and Techniques is a course that meets all the current requirements for Missouri State EMT-Basic licensure. It includes the assessment and care of the sick and injured, pediatric and geriatric emergencies, childbirth, defibrillation, lifting and moving of patients, hazardous material situations and the use of adjunctive EMS equipment.
EMT-122	EMT Internship	This course is designed to give students hands-on experience with foundational skills and introduce paramedic topics related to medical terminology, paramedic procedures, and situations encountered in ambulance field work. The course includes 100 hours of EMT practicum in an assigned pre-hospital setting. Additional hours required.
ENG-001	The Sentence	This course will help students master the fundamental of sentence writing and punctuation. It is a skill-building course.	
ENG-003	Sentence Combining	Using a selected sequence of sentence building exercises, this course will help students develop a feel for both sentence structure and paragraph organization. It is a "skill-building" course, whose main purpose is to help students hear the stylistic options available to them and to help them see patterns of development, both in sentences and paragraphs.	
ENG-004	Grammar Review	This course will provide instruction for students who need extensive help with writing problems which may include punctuation, capitalization, usage, sentence construction, coherence and organization.	
ENG-005	Writing Improvement	Students work individually on writing style, documentation, and other problems of advanced expository writing.	
ENG-006	Writing Effective Paragraphs	This course will help students who have already mastered the writing of sentences to learn about writing longer forms. Beginning with the writing of good topic sentences, it will proceed to consider such issues as paragraph development, unity and coherence. Thus, it will provide an additional valuable support for students who intend to write essays, business letters, stories and other longer prose forms.	
ENG-007	Business Writing Review	This course will provide instruction in business writing formats  e-mails, letters, memos, and/or reports.	
ENG-013	ESL: Academic English Prep	This course is designed for non-native English speakers who need to improve basic language skills before beginning the ESL Academic English sequence. Students will work individually with the assistance of the designated ESL support staff.
ENG-014	ESL: Academic Listening Comprehension	This course is designed to help non-native English speakers increase their ability in listening comprehension. Students will work individually with the assistance of the designated ESL support staff.	
ENG-015	ESL: Vocabulary Development for Non-native Speakers	This course is designed to help non-native English speakers increase their knowledge of English vocabulary, especially idioms and general academic vocabulary. Students will work individually with the assistance of the designated ESL support staff.	
ENG-017	ESL: Writing Skills	This course is designed for students who need to demonstrate improved skills in Academic English outcomes before proceeding to the next level. Students will work individually with the assistance of the designated ESL support staff.
ENG-020	Developmental English	This course provides comprehensive review and development of student ability in English sentences, paragraphs, and multiple paragraph texts. The course focuses on topics such as development, organization, grammar, sentences, paragraphs, and essay structure.
ENG-030	Introduction to College Writing	This course is designed primarily to prepare students for College Composition I. The course develops students' abilities in writing multiple paragraph texts and will focus on topics such as development, organization, grammar, sentences, paragraphs, and essay structure.
ENG-050	Academic English for Non-native Speakers I	This course is designed for non-native English speakers who wish to develop English language skills necessary for success in college courses. Instruction in the course will promote overall English language proficiency, with an intensive focus on reading and writing. Additional hours in lab or with an ESL tutor may be required.
ENG-051	English Grammar for Non-Native Speakers I	This course provides non-native English speakers with a review of basic English grammar rules, with attention given to form, meaning, and use. Students will apply rules through speaking and writing activities.
ENG-053	Listening and Note-Taking for Non-native Speakers	This course is designed for non-native speakers who are new to the higher education system in the USA. Students will develop all language skills, with a focus on listening and note-taking skills, vocabulary, and lecture and discussion structure and content.
ENG-060	Academic English for Non-native Speakers II	This course is designed for non-native English speakers who have demonstrated general fluency in reading and writing English, and need to develop clarity in using English for academic purposes. Instruction in the course will focus on reading and writing responses to texts. Additional hours in lab or with ESL tutor may be recommended.
ENG-061	English Grammar for Non-native Speakers II	This course provides non-native English speakers with an intensive review of basic English grammar, with emphasis on application of rules to academic reading and writing tasks.
ENG-062	Spoken Communication and Pronunciation for Non-native Speakers	This course is designed for non-native English speakers who wish to improve their comprehensibility in communicating in English. The course will provide practice in stress, rhythm, and intonation patterns, and in troublesome consonant and vowel sounds.
ENG-070	Academic English for Non-native Speakers III	This course is designed to facilitate non-native English speakers' performance in college-level courses which require moderate to heavy amounts of reading, writing, and note-taking. Students recommended to take ENG 070 will have achieved the reading and writing performance outcomes of ENG 050 and ENG 060, but still need to improve grammatical and lexical accuracy in a variety of writing tasks. Reading and writing assignments will be linked to assignments in content areas.
ENG-071	English Grammar for Non-native Speakers III	This course is for non-native speakers of English to improve the grammatical accuracy in their written English. The course will provide students with intensive reinforcement and practice of structures taught in previous grammar courses. Written practice will emphasize personal essays and tasks related to shorter academic reading passages.
ENG-100	Career English	This course primarily focuses on the development of career-related writing techniques. Students will develop writing styles, writing processes, revision practices, and analytical skills necessary for the workplace.
ENG-101	College Composition I	This course primarily focuses on the development of writing techniques. Students will develop effective writing styles, writing processes, revision practices, and analytical skills.
ENG-102	College Composition II	This course builds on knowledge and skills learned in ENG 101 and primarily focuses on argumentative and persuasive writing techniques. Students will develop effective writing processes, writing styles, research abilities, analytical skills, and argumentative tools.
ENG-103	Report Writing	This course builds on knowledge and skills learned in previous writing courses and primarily focuses on the development of writing techniques required in fields such as business, health science, technology, and engineering. Students will develop effective writing styles, writing processes, and analytical skills for business and technical writing.
ENG-110	Creative Writing	This course is designed to illustrate the creative process and value of creative literature, including three of the following genres  poetry, fiction, drama, and creative nonfiction. Students learn about various themes, perspectives, and approaches associated with creative writing, as well as the creative writing process and methods of submitting creative work for publication.
ENG-114	Writing Plays and Film Scripts	This course is for beginning and experienced writers of plays and film scripts. The course is designed to illustrate the creative writing process beginning with the importance of drafting, audience feedback, and revision, and ending with the methods of submitting plays and film scripts for publication and production.
ENG-201	Introduction to Fiction	This course provides students with an understanding of short and long fiction. Students have the opportunity to study various forms and styles of fiction as well as the major themes and concepts presented within this genre.
ENG-202	Introduction to Poetry and Plays	This course focuses on the pleasures of poetry and drama. By reading, analysis, discussions and student projects, the student should gain a familiarity with the statements and craft of a selection of American, European, African and Oriental poems and plays.
ENG-203	American Literature	American Literature will provide the students with an opportunity to confront a significant part of their literary heritage. This course examines the broad social and ethnic diversity of American writers; it shows how Americans live now and how they used to live. It covers a broad range of subject matter and literary types. It concentrates on appreciation. Also, it pays some attention to the ways in which the works experienced relate to our historical and cultural values.
ENG-204	American Literature Before 1865	This course is a study of representative works of American literature including socially and ethnically diverse writers from the pre-colonial period to 1865, with particular focus on the development of a unique national literature that reflects evolving notions of American identity through the Civil War.
ENG-205	American Literature Between 1865 and 1945	Presenting United States literature written between 1865 and 1945, this course includes writers such as Adams, Cather, Chopin, Crane, Cullen, Cummings, Dickinson, DuBois, Eliot, Faulkner, Fitzgerald, Frost, Gilman, H.D., Hemingway, Hughes, James, Jewett, Millay, Moore, O'Neill, Porter, Pound, Stevens, Twain, Washington, Wharton, Whitman, Williams.
ENG-206	American Literature After 1945	Presenting United States literature after 1945, this course includes writers such as Albee, Baldwin, Bellow, Bishop, Brooks, Ellison, Erdrich, Ginsberg, Gluck, Kingston, Levertov, Lowell, Malamud, Miller, Morrison, Plath, Rich, Sexton, Shepard, Silko, Snyder, Updike, Vonnegut, Welty, Williams, and Wright.
ENG-207	Humor in American Literature	This course explores American humor primarily in written sketches, short stories, and novels by authors from Twain and Thurber to Bombeck and Vonnegut. It also analyzes jokes, movies, comic strips, stand-up comedians, and television sit-coms. The course questions what American humor is, what forces have shaped its growth, what personal and social functions it serves, and what value it might have for contemporary Americans.
ENG-211	British Literature After 1800	This course provides a survey study of representative works of British writers after 1800. Works will be examined in the context of the dominant social, cultural, and artistic concerns of the period as reflected in the literature.
ENG-213	The Short Novel	This course offers an introduction to the short novel or novella, a work situated between a short story and a novel, and is organized around works by writers from both within and outside the Unites States with emphasis on the short fiction form and historical and cultural context. Geographical focus varies from semester to semester, as do choices of literary genres.
ENG-214	Contemporary Literature	This course is a study of representative works of literature produced within the last thirty years with an emphasis on recent and developing literary trends and forms alongside an investigation of the culture and values of contemporary society. Geographical focus varies from semester to semester as does the choice of literary genres.
ENG-215	Gothic, Horror and Fantasy	This course focuses on major themes of gothic, horror, and fantasy literature. Students have the opportunity to study representative works of gothic, horror and fantasy as well as examine the causes, effects, and contexts of these genres across an international spectrum of writers, formats, and subjects.
ENG-216	Women in Literature	This course explores the experiences of women as authors and characters in local, national, and international literature. Topics and reading will focus on the roles, challenges, and contributions women have made in the area of literary studies in various contexts and communities.
ENG-217	Major Black Writers	This course focuses on selected literary works by popular Black writers across the African Diaspora. The writings of the authors have gained public attention by virtue of their excellence or historical significance. Students have the opportunity to examine various literary works, forms, and styles of these writers and the various contexts in which they are placed. 
ENG-218	Literature of American Minorities	A study of American minority (racial and religious) experience and cultural contributions to the nation by explaining them through literature.
ENG-224	Fiction Writing	This course is intended for students to further develop their understanding of fiction and their abilities in narrative writing. Students learn about various themes, perspectives, and approaches associated with fiction, as well as the creative writing process and methods of submitting creative work for publication.
ENG-225	Poetry Writing	This course is intended for students to further develop their understanding of poetry and their abilities in poetry writing. Students learn about various themes, perspectives, and approaches associated with poetry, as well as the creative writing process and methods of submitting creative work for publication.
ENG-226	Children's Literature	This course will familiarize students with examples of good children's books, for children from infancy to adolescence. It will also help students develop the ability to evaluate a book, analyze its appeal, and present it effectively. (Same course as EDU 226.)
ENG-228	Studies in Literature	This course allows students to study specific themes, theories, genres, movements, perspectives, or historical periods within the contexts of literature. Literary topics and genres vary from semester to semester. This course may be retaken for credit with different topics. Please refer to the Interactive Course Schedule for current course topics.
ENG-230	Environmental Literature	This course explores ecological, sustainable global themes and nature aesthetics in literature. Readings include an interdisciplinary, transnational, and multi-genre mixture of non-fiction prose, prose fiction, and poetry.
ENG-231	World Literature	This course offers an introduction to the classic writings organized around various national communities. Its geographical focus varies from semester to semester, as do its choices of literary genres. Students will learn how to read and analyze national writers and their works within historical and cultural contexts.
ENG-233	Writing Memoirs and Creative Nonfiction	This course is intended for students to further develop their understanding of creative nonfiction and their abilities in writing nonfiction prose forms, such as the personal essay, memoir, travel narrative, and/or biography. Students learn about various methodologies, ethical concerns, and perspectives associated with creative nonfiction, as well as the writing process and methods of submitting work for publication.
ENG-234	Literary Publishing	This course allows students to gain experience in the production practices of literary publications. Students will become exposed to various stages of the editing and publishing process as well as utilize design software to produce a literary publication.
ESC-100	Engineering Computer Applications and Design	This course provides the student with basic skills in the use of Computer Aided Drafting (CAD), word-processing, spreadsheets, and computer math software. Students will be divided into teams to solve an engineering related design problem. They will need to conceptualize and build their project/product, and prepare and present a report. They will utilize the computer and applications software they have learned in the class as a tool in preparation and presentation of their report.
ESC-101	Scientific Computer Programming	This course emphasizes instruction in computer programming language to solve engineering problems. Instruction will include such topics as  study of digital computer systems, programming techniques, program structure, coding, execution, debugging and verification of programs. Computer laboratory exercises will be conducted to analyze, interpret and synthesize engineering data.
ESC-200	Engineering Circuits I	This is a problem-solving course that develops analytical skills important for all engineering disciplines as well as fundamental circuit theory for electrical engineers. The course covers circuit elements and the fundamental laws governing their behavior, network theorems, and analysis techniques, including transient responses. Circuit simulation using computer models and practical circuit testing are included in the laboratory work. Additional lab hours required.
ESC-201	Engineering Circuits II	This is a problem solving course that develops analytical skills important for all engineering disciplines as well as all fundamental circuit theory for electrical engineers. The course covers sinusoidal AC circuit analysis (including AC power and three-phase systems, mutual inductance and transformers, complex frequency, and filters. The primary focus of this course is on phasors and frequency-domain responses. Laboratory work will include circuit simulation using computer models, as well as practical limitations of these models. Additional lab hours required.
ESC-203	Engineering Mechanics I	Application of the principles of mechanics to the solution of engineering problems involving particles and systems in equilibrium. Topics include force systems in equilibrium, centers of gravity, friction, moments of inertia. Where appropriate, vector analysis is used.
ESC-204	Engineering Mechanics II	Application of the principles of mechanics to the solution of engineering problems involving particle and rigid body motion. Topics include linear, curvilinear relative motion, energy, impulse, and momentum. Where appropriate, vector methods are used.
ESC-205	Mechanics of Materials	Application of principles of mechanics to engineering problems of strength and stiffness. Topics include stress, strain, thin cylinders, beams, torsion, columns, and combined stresses at a point.
ESC-206	Strength of Materials Lab	This is the laboratory component of the Mechanics of Materials course (ESC 205). Students will perform tension, compression, shear, torsion, bending, and hardness tests on various materials in a materials testing laboratory. The students will be required to document their test data and write reports summarizing the test and results.
ESC-207	Engineering Thermodynamics	Energy transformations and the relation of energy to the states of matter. Fundamental laws, concepts and modes of analysis which underlie all applications of energy conversion in engineering.
FD-101	Funeral Management/Merchandising	The practices and procedures of establishing a funeral home are covered including personnel management, vital statistics, records and forms. Government regulations of OSHA, FTC and ADA are studied. An in-depth study of merchandising funeral goods including caskets and vaults is covered.
FD-102	Funeral Service Psychology	This course studies the implications of grief and bereavement and the role of the funeral director in counseling the bereaved. The social role of the funeral director in the dynamics of grief and an investigation into the changing attitudes toward death is also studied.
FD-103	History of Funeral Service	The historic role of the funeral director is investigated from ancient to present day as well as projected directions and functions of the funeral profession. Ethical and legal implications of these changing trends are discussed. Various religious, ethnic, fraternal and military practices are studied.
FD-104	Funeral Service Law	This course identifies the methods of disposing of human remains and the legal responsibilities of the funeral director. Principles of both mortuary and business law are covered from the local, state and federal level. Cemetery regulations, liability and pre-need are also studied.
FIN-100	Personal Finance	This course involves the study of personal financial planning and is intended to provide the student with a basis of knowledge that will enable the individual to better manage their income while maximizing the value received for the expenditures made. This course also addresses the safeguarding of assets and will provide the student with the tools for developing their own financial plan. Topics may include financial planning, developing personal financial statements and plans, insurance needs, basic taxing theories, and stock market options for personal financial planning.
FIN-201	Fundamentals of Finance	Basic methods and principles of finance, such as money and banking, financing working capital and fixed capital needs, stocks and bonds, the marketing of securities, and the working of financial institutions.
FIR-100	Fire Department Apparatus	A study of the description and specification of the various fire department apparatus found in the modern organization, special emphasis is given to manufacturer's specifications, analysis of the various codes and standards of construction and methods of writing specifications for various pieces of equipment. In addition, the instruction covers the principles of care maintenance, and operation of the various types of apparatus including principles of pumping, pumps, and accessories, power development and transmissions and pumping practices.
FIR-102	Fire Characteristics	Characteristics and behavior of fire found in ordinary materials and special materials such as oils and other combustible chemicals. A review of basic chemistry with emphasis on combustion and internal combustion. Hazards of liquids and gases, special techniques in regard to oxygen supplies.
FIR-103	Fire Service Management and Administration	Instruction in management and administration for the fire service including the functions of management, planning, organizing, directing, controlling, the management cycle, motivation, behavioral science, executive development, educational development, and labor relations.
FIR-105	Inspection and Fire Prevention	Inspection surveying and mapping procedures associated with the organization and function of fire prevention. A survey of the various codes and standards; how these various standards are used in inspecting buildings for fire hazards; how to actually inspect a building with respect to existing fire protection equipment-structural details that must be known to avoid undue loss in case of fire. Opportunity will be provided to make at least one complete inspection and report on an operating industry.
FIR-106	Teaching Techniques for Fire Department Personnel	The basic theories of learning and methods of instruction are discussed. The use of lectures, demonstrations, and visual aids as applied to the instruction of fire department personnel is illustrated. Practice is provided in the use of lesson plans, visual aids, tests, and other teaching devices including module on the use of microcomputers as an instructional device. Each student's application of a teaching procedure is critically discussed and evaluated.
FIR-110	Basic Fire Protection and Alarm Systems	A study of modern fire protection, including water supply, private fire protection methods, chemical extinguishers, and a study of various types of fixed and portable fire detection and alarm systems. This will include municipal, central station, proprietary and local alarm systems; heat, flame and smoke detectors; telephone, teletype and radio systems.
FIR-111	Fire Fighter I	This course presents students with the in-depth knowledge and performance skills necessary to function as members of a fire department and prepares students to sit for the state certification exam. Additional lab hours required.
FIR-112	Fire Fighter II	This course presents students with the advanced knowledge and performance skills necessary to function as members of a fire department and prepares students to sit for the state certification exam. Additional lab hours required.
FIR-202	Fire Investigation	Methods determining point of origin, path of fire travel and fire causes; motives and methods for fire setting, recognizing and preserving evidence; arson laws, and types of arson fires, court testimony, reports and records.
FIR-204	Fire Fighting Tactics and Strategy	Fundamental strategy and method of attack employed for various fire problems. Principles of fire fighting as applied to small and large scale fire problems and problems that are complex or unique in nature. Some practice with problems involving the use of tactics and strategy that employ equipment and manpower at various organizational levels.
FIR-205	Fire Science Hydraulics	A study of the mechanics of liquids, particularly as pertains to water flow, hydrants, pumps, standpipes, hoses, nozzles, sprinkler systems as adapted to fire fighting practices. This involves interpretation of readings from various kinds of manometers, pressure gauges, and hydrostatic devices. Fluids in motion, head calculations, pumping problems, friction losses, cavitation, velocity of flow, use of pitot and venturi meters, are studied. Also the problems of supplying fire service pumpers and efficiently using them is studied.
FIR-207	Codes and Ordinances	A detailed study of national, state and local ordinances applicable to the fire service and electrical, plumbing and building codes. Some coverage of problems in mutual aid pacts and agreements with other fire departments, and relations with civil defense and other government agencies.
FIR-208	Hazardous Materials	A second semester of basic fundamentals of chemistry used in fire science with emphasis on less common special hazards. Topics covered will include nuclear reactions, ionization, radiation detection equipment, peacetime uses of radioactive materials and control of resulting hazards.
FIR-210	Architectural Structural Representation-Materials	Basic fundamentals of building plan reading including conventional delineation, symbols, abbreviations, methods of showing floor plans, elevations, and dimensions. Also basic characteristics of various materials and building structural systems when subjected to fire.
FRE-101	Elementary French I	This is the beginning course which introduces the basic sentence structure and vocabulary necessary to participate in elementary French conversations. Additional course topics include  reading short French passages, aspects of contemporary culture, and a variety of grammatical forms useful in writing French prose. Supplemental online lab work is required.
FRE-102	Elementary French II	This course continues to focus on the topics introduced in FRE 101. These include more complex sentence structures and an expanded vocabulary necessary to participate in French conversations. Additional course topics include  reading short French passages of increasing complexity, elements of contemporary culture, and a number of grammatical forms useful when writing in French. Supplemental online lab work is required.
FRE-201	Intermediate French I	A continuation of FRE 102. Emphasis is on becoming proficient in using the language so that students can function in a francophone culture. Primary concentration is on developing speaking and listening skills. Testing is both oral and written.
FRE-202	Intermediate French II	The major emphasis is preparing students to be functioning members of a French speaking community. The student will gain the linguistic skills necessary to perform in everyday situations. Speaking and listening skills are further developed. Testing is both oral and written. Additional lab hours required.
FSE-101	History and Sociology of Funeral Service	This course surveys funeral and burial customs associated with the beliefs and practices in various cultures from the early Egyptians to present day. In addition, the general principles related to customs, religions, human relations, social behavior, and their influences on funeral practices will be examined. Successful completion of this course is required for subsequent enrollment in all FSE courses in the AAS/FSE program.
FSE-102	Dynamics of Grief Management	This course explores the topic of funeral service psychology, which includes the theories of grief, the purposes of the funeral rite, and the importance of interpersonal communication skills and basic helping techniques.
FSE-103	Funeral Directing	This course introduces the primary duties and responsibilities of the funeral director. Special emphasis is placed on the funeral director's role in working with the family of the decedent, as they select options for funeral rites, ceremonies, and committal services. Legal and ethical obligations, as well as the value of effective communication skills, are also examined.
FSE-104	Funeral Directing Practicum I	This course introduces the practical aspects of funeral home operations, which includes local, state, and federal laws as they pertain to funeral service. In addition, students will participate in funeral arranging, funeral directing, and committal service procedures. All funeral directing functions will be performed under the direct supervision of a licensed funeral director and the St. Louis Community College Funeral Service Education faculty. Additional hours required.
FSE-105	Funeral Directing Practicum II	This course is a continuation of Funeral Directing Practicum I and will provide additional experience with the practical aspects of funeral home operations, which includes local, state, and federal laws as they pertain to funeral service. In addition, students will participate in funeral arranging, funeral directing, and committal service procedures. All funeral directing functions will be performed under the direct supervision of a licensed funeral director and the St. Louis Community College Funeral Service Education faculty. Additional hours required.
FSE-106	Mortuary Law and Ethics	This course introduces legal and ethical issues in the funeral service profession. This includes the sources of business law, mortuary law, rights and duties regarding disposition of dead bodies, state and federal regulation of funeral homes, funeral directors and cemeteries, probate law, and funeral professional ethics.
FSE-107	Funeral Service Merchandising	This course introduces the practical aspects of product knowledge and merchandising for caskets, outer burial containers, and other related funeral service merchandise. Required minimum course grade  "C" or higher. 
FSE-201	Funeral Home Management	This course introduces management principles for funeral home operations, which includes human resources, financial, marketing, facilities, and office management, as well as their application to the small business environment.
FSE-202	Embalming I	This course will provide discussion of the theoretical aspects of embalming, as well as examining the purpose and need for embalming, types of death, signs of death, tests for death, postmortem changes, ethics of embalming, chemical and physical changes, formulating chemical solutions, and selection and raising of vessels.
FSE-203	Embalming Practicum I	This course applies the theoretical aspects of an embalming operation. All embalming operations are performed under the direct supervision and instruction of a licensed embalmer and the St. Louis Community College Funeral Service Education faculty. Additional hours required.
FSE-204	Embalming II	This course illustrates the advanced theoretical aspects of embalming and is a continuation of FSE 203. Special emphasis is placed on the principles and techniques of embalming, which includes case analysis, methods of injection and drainage, cavity embalming, and special problem cases.
FSE-205	Embalming Practicum II	This course applies the theoretical aspects of an embalming operation, with emphasis placed upon advanced procedures for embalming autopsy and trauma cases. Embalming operations are performed under the direct supervision and instruction of a licensed embalmer and the St. Louis Community College Funeral Service Education. Additional hours required.
FSE-206	Restorative Art	This course prepares the student to recognize and apply the various restorative and cosmetology techniques used in the restoration of the deceased. Additional hours required.
FSE-207	Microbiology and Pathology for Funeral Service	This course introduces the principles of microbiology and pathology, especially as they can be applied to the embalming and restorative art processes. Special emphasis will be placed on tissue pathology and major causative agents of death.
FSE-208	Funeral Service Seminar	Comprehensive preparation for and completion of the International Conference of Funeral Service Examining Board, Inc. National Board Examination (NBE). Student must pass both the Funeral Service Arts and Funeral Service Sciences section of the NBE to graduate from the Funeral Service program.
GE-101	Technical Computer Applications	This course is an introduction to the use of personal computers in technology. Topics of this course include PC hardware, operating systems, word processing, spreadsheets, graphics and the Internet. 
GE-121	Principles of Engineering	This course is an introduction to the opportunities and responsibilities of Engineering. Students will learn the field of Engineering, and explore Engineering Careers. They will complete projects in Design, Engineering Systems, Thermodynamics, Fluid Systems, Electrical and Control Systems, Strength and Properties of Materials, and Production Process and Quality Control.	
GE-122	Engineering Design and Development	Students will work in teams to design and build solutions to authentic engineering problems. Student teams will make progress reports to their peers, mentor and instructor, and will present their research paper and defend their projects to a panel of engineers, business leaders and instructors for professional review and feedback.
GE-131	Engineering Technology Orientation	This course introduces students to college level thinking skills, interpersonal skills, effective study skills and college services necessary for academic and professional success in engineering technology. Students will also be exposed to career opportunities and responsibilities in various fields of technology. Additional lab  hours required.
GE-133	Quantitative Methods in Engineering Technologies	This is a study of the mathematical and scientific applications found in engineering technologies. Topics include SI (metric) and customary (English) conversions, Pythagorean applications and triangular structures, and electrical resistance. Mechanical and electrical systems applications are demonstrated and investigated for each topic area.
GE-151	Introduction to Aerospace Engineering	This course will expose students to the world of aeronautics, flight and engineering. Through activity-based, project-based and problem-based learning students will be engaged in engineering design problems related to aerospace information systems, astronautics, rocketry, propulsion, the physics of space science, space life sciences, principles of aeronautics, structures and materials, and systems engineering. Additional lab hours required.
GE-240	Product Design and Fabrication	This course presents students with an authentic engineering design challenge. Engineering technology students from a variety of disciplines, work together to define problems, evaluate possible solutions and build a functional prototype. The course brings together skills developed in other engineering and technology courses. Additional lab hours required.
GE-290	Workplace Learning: General Engineering	1-6	This workplace-based course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the industry to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum 50 hours per credit hour in the workplace throughout the term.
GEG-101	Regional Geography	This course surveys various world regions, their major countries, and the physical, cultural, economic, and political roles of these countries within the global family of nations. This course introduces the discipline of geography and provides understanding of the world, its different people, places, and regions. Regional Geography also places an emphasis on the ways that people and places interact across space and time to produce particular outcomes. Technological innovations, the spread of political/economic ideologies, and the movement of people and goods across the globe have made most contemporary problems and solutions global in nature.
GEG-103	Physical Geography	This course introduces the characteristics of the Earth's surface and the interaction of processes that produce a world pattern of distinctive environments significant to humanity. Topics include Earth surface processes and the development of landforms and landscapes; weather and climate; soils and vegetation and their global distribution.
GEG-106	World Geography	This course surveys the continents of the Earth, including the study of geographical regions, their functions, location, and cultural landscape. This course explores climate, resources, and landforms and studies how humans interact with the physical earth. This course covers both physical and human geography.
GEN-200	Capstone	In this culminating experience of the general education curriculum, the student demonstrates the skills of higher order thinking, valuing, managing information and communicating through the independent, scholarly, self-directed project.
GEO-100	Earth Science	This introductory geoscience course emphasizes basic principles of astronomy, geology, oceanography and meteorology. Topics covered include the origin of the Universe, solar system and Earth, minerals and rocks, plate tectonics geologic time, prehistoric life and evolution, ocean structure and life, weather and climate change.
GEO-101	Earth Science (Laboratory)	Laboratory and field experiences illustrating the principles of earth science. Additional lab hours required.
GEO-103	Environmental Geology	This introductory geoscience course focuses on natural hazards and the human consequences associated with geologic processes. Topics include the study of plate tectonics, earthquakes, volcanoes, floods, tornadoes, storms, wildfires, climate change and global warming. Emphasis is placed on how those hazards affect humans and how human activity affects Earth's environment.
GEO-104	Prehistoric Life	This course is an introductory Historical Geology course that emphasizes paleontology and evolution through the fossil record. Topics covered include the origin of the Universe, the origin and evolution of Earth through geologic processes, plate tectonics, origin and evolution of life on Earth through four billion years of geologic time and hands-on study of fossils including dinosaurs.
GEO-111	Physical Geology	This course introduces earth processes and products, including the origin of rocks, volcanos, landforms, mountain belts, earthquakes, and the structure of Earth within the framework of plate tectonics. The interdependence between humans and the geological environment is emphasized throughout the course. A one-day fieldtrip is required. Additional lab hours required.
GEO-113	Oceanography	This introductory Oceanography course focuses on the geological aspects of oceanography combined with the physical, chemical and biological processes in the ocean. Topics covered include the origin of the Universe, Earth and life, plate tectonics, waves, atmosphere and marine life. Special emphasis is placed on worldwide, human-induced changes within the marine environment.
GEO-123	Geologic Field Experiences in North America	This field course studies the geology of North America. Topics include basic geologic mapping and measuring skills utilizing geological instrumentation, understanding geologic features, rock types, mineral identification and fossil identification through experiential learning. Planning session(s) prior to departure is required. Laboratory work is in a field setting and a major part of the course. Evening lectures and student presentations in the field are required. Additional hours required.
GER-101	Elementary German I	This course is a beginning course presenting the basic sentence structure, vocabulary, and cultural knowledge necessary to participate in elementary German conversations and to begin reading short German passages. Additional topics include  aspects of contemporary culture and a variety of grammatical forms useful in writing German prose.
GER-102	Elementary German II	A continuation of GER 101. Students complete the basic elements of German grammar, increase their vocabulary and gain added facility in speaking and reading German. Additional lab hours required.
GER-201	Intermediate German I	A continuation of GER 102. Emphasis is on speaking German. A review of grammar assists the student in perfecting basic skills. A variety of up-to-date literary and cultural selections are read and form the basis for classroom discussions. Additional lab hours required.
GER-202	Intermediate German II	A continuation of GER 201. Emphasis is on spoken German with continued grammar review. A variety of short stories and contemporary cultural selections are read and discussed in class. Additional lab hours required.
GLE-101	Global Education Studies	1-3	This course will present an opportunity for students to travel to and to engage in the direct study of international cultures in order to foster an enhanced sensitivity to, appreciation of, and an understanding of the global community.
HIT-101	Medical Terminology	This course provides a broad survey of the language of medicine and health technologies. Students learn to accurately spell and define common medical terms related to major disease processes, diagnostic procedures, laboratory tests, abbreviations, drugs, and treatment modalities. Emphasis is placed on formation, definition and pronunciation. (Same as course IS 205).
HIT-102	Health Information Management Technology	This course introduces healthcare data content and structure including its collection, arrangement, presentation, and verification. Healthcare data sets, primary and secondary record systems, and data quality and integrity are introduced. Students learn how Information Technology (IT) supports healthcare delivery and are introduced to health information systems concepts and applications. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course.
HIT-103	Healthcare Delivery Systems	This course describes the organization of healthcare delivery in the United States. Students are introduced to healthcare organizations, their structure and operations, external standards, regulations and initiatives including licensure, certification, accreditation, and Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Payment and reimbursement methodologies are discussed for each type of healthcare provider and setting. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course.
HIT-104	Basic Principles of Disease	This course is an in-depth study of common pathological conditions of the human body. Course focus is on description of conditions and diseases of the organ systems including etiology, signs and symptoms, methods of diagnosis, and treatment. Expected student outcomes include ability to pronounce disease terminology, to analyze signs and symptoms in identifying disease entities and ability to describe appropriate diagnostic and treatment modalities. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Students should enroll in HIT 105 in the same semester.
HIT-105	Pharmacology for Health Information Technology Professionals	This course is a study of drug classifications, drug dosage and administration, and diagnostic procedures. Instruction includes pronunciation of medications, along with information on recognizing common laboratory findings and knowing the significance of abnormal findings in disease processes. At the conclusion of the course, the student should be able to apply knowledge regarding medications and tests used in treatment and diagnosis of abnormal human conditions, and recognize and apply J codes from Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) to medications. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Students should enroll in HIT 104 in the same semester.
HIT-106	Diagnosis Coding Systems I	This course introduces current clinical coding, classifications, taxonomies, nomenclatures, terminologies, clinical vocabularies and auditing. Principles and applications of current industry standards for International Classifications of Diseases (ICD) and the relationship of Diagnosis-Related Groupings (DRGs) to coding will be covered. Use of computerized encoding and application software and work processes to support clinical classification and coding is required. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Students should enroll in HIT 107 in the same semester.
HIT-107	Procedure Coding Systems I	This course is an introduction to the current industry standards for procedural coding in various healthcare settings. Reading and interpreting healthcare documentation to classify services and procedures will be covered. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Students should enroll in HIT 106 in the same semester.
HIT-110	Healthcare Legal and Ethical Issues	This course investigates ethical issues in healthcare while examining the procedures and laws that regulate the content, confidentiality, disclosure, use, and retention of health information. Patient rights/advocacy, advanced directives, privacy, release of information, and security policies and procedures of healthcare organizations will be emphasized. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course.
HIT-201	Healthcare Reimbursement	This course compares and contrasts healthcare payers, illustrates the reimbursement cycle, and compliance with regulatory guidelines. Payment methodologies and systems are compared using computerized encoding and grouping software, Diagnosis-Related Groups (DRGs), Ambulatory Payment Classifications (APCs), and Resource Utilization Groups (RUGs) as assigned. Chargemaster maintenance and reimbursement monitoring and reporting are emphasized. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course.
HIT-206	Diagnosis Coding Systems II	This course is a continuation of Diagnosis Coding Systems I. Students are introduced to intermediate coding cases and scenarios along with Diagnosis Related Groups (DRGs) and their relationship to clinical coding. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Students should enroll in HIT 207 in the same semester.
HIT-207	Procedure Coding Systems II	This course is a continuation of Procedure Coding Systems I. Students use computerized encoding systems and healthcare data/content to assign appropriate current standard Procedure codes. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Students should enroll in HIT 206 in the same semester.
HIT-208	Advanced Coding Applications	This course is the capstone course for the Medical Billing and Coding Certificate of Proficiency Program. This course provides students with extensive practice to apply their knowledge of anatomy, the clinical disease process, diagnosis and procedural terminology and pharmacology for correct code assignment and sequencing using various clinical classification systems. This course is a culmination of
HIT-210	Professional Practice Experience	This course allows students to experience the American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA) electronic-Health Information Management (e-HIM) Virtual Lab in an environment that closely simulates real-world application of various technologies. Students apply problem-solving and analysis skills, and gain experience and familiarity with a range of healthcare applications including patient identification, administrative and reimbursement coding, data capture, and abstracting. Students create professional portfolios and engage in professional leadership activities and discussions. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Medical Billing and Coding majors should enroll in HIT 208 in the same semester. Health Information Technology majors should enroll in HIT 291 in the same semester.
HIT-211	Electronic Health Systems	This course emphasizes the role of Information Technology in healthcare, describes key elements of health information systems, defines the electronic health record (EHR), and establishes the context of the EHR within the scope of health information technology (HIT). Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course.
HIT-213	Quality and Performance Improvement in Healthcare	This course introduces students to the theory, practice and management of quality performance and improvement through examination of peer review processes, collection tools, data analysis and reporting techniques. Utilization, risk, and case management are blended concepts used throughout this course. Regulatory quality monitoring requirements and outcome measures monitoring are addressed. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course.
HIT-214	Calculating and Reporting Healthcare Statistics	This course focuses on the management of medical data for statistical purposes to include descriptive statistics such as means, frequencies, ranges, percentiles and standard deviations. Knowledge-based research techniques are explored. Vital statistics, registries and national guidelines regarding human subject research are examined along with Institutional Review Board (IRB) processes. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course.
HIT-291	Workplace Learning: Health Information Technology	This course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of health information technology to enhance their preparation for entering the field. A minimum 100 hours in the workplace throughout the term will be completed. Communication skills and techniques for the workplace are emphasized throughout the course. Students should enroll in HIT 210 in the same semester. All other courses in this program must be completed prior to enrollment in this course.
HMS-100	Introduction to Human Services	A survey course to introduce students to human and community needs and to the concepts of the helping profession. Students examine community resources, the relationship of agencies and bureaucracies to the total community, and the worker's role and responsibility in the helping profession.
HMS-101	Human Services: Theories and Skills	An overview of methodology used in the helping profession. Course will include an analysis of helping relationships, a study of interpersonal skills and practice techniques. A process-oriented approach to solving individual, family and community problems will be stressed.
HMS-102	Human Services: Policy and Politics	An analysis of the political process involved in the formulation of social welfare policies from a historical point of view. Federal, state and local programs will be examined in terms of skills and knowledge to affect program planning and delivery.
HMS-111	Group Practice in Human Services	This course will focus on the basic issues of group work in Human Services settings. The theory behind group work practice, a study of the various types of groups, ethical issues, group leadership and the process of forming and working with groups will be covered.
HMS-118	Aging and Disabilities	This course will focus on the aging process and the manifestations of aging in persons with congenital or acquired disabilities. Current habitation, rehabilitation programs and recent technologies will be explored. Discussions will also center on aging care providers and their concerns and needs.
HMS-119	Introduction to the Field of Disabilities	A course designed to provide an overview of issues in the field of disabilities. Discussions focus on the service delivery system and ways in which current legislation, inclusionary models, and other trends impact the lives of persons with disabilities and their care givers. Resources and careers in disabilities will be explored.
HMS-120	Team Building: Working with Care Givers	Focus is on communication, cooperation, and collaboration with care givers of persons with disabilities. Presented will be choices, decision-making, support systems, which aid persons with disabilities and their care givers with full inclusion into society.
HMS-121	Working with Challenging Behaviors	This course provides students with the learning and application of intervention skills to assist individuals with disabilities to achieve their full potential. Focus is on providing support in community settings to persons with disabilities whose behaviors pose challenges.
HMS-122	Health Issues and Persons with Disabilities	Introduction to the basic principles of the health, etiology, and prognosis of specific disabilities. First aid, CPR, medicine administration and other emergency concerns will be explored. Experiences focusing on personal care assistance, positioning, transferring, feeding, etc. for disabled will be learned. 
HMS-123	Inclusion in the Community	Designed to help care givers and/or paraprofessionals prepare individuals with disabilities for maximum empowerment and self-advocacy in their respective communities. Introduction to and discussion of alternative living situations and supports needed for inclusion. Staff career competencies explored.
HMS-201	Workplace Learning I: Human Services	This workplace-based course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the function of the organization to enhance their preparation for entering the Human Services field. Minimum 50 hours per credit hour in the workplace throughout the term. Concurrent enrollment in HMS 203 required.
HMS-202	Workplace Learning II: Human Services	This workplace-based course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the function of the organization to enhance their preparation for entering the Human Services field. Minimum 50 hours per credit hour in the workplace throughout the term.  Concurrent enrollment in HMS 204 required.
HMS-203	Human Services Workplace Learning Seminar I	Discussion and analysis in small groups of the human services practicum experience. There will be special learning objectives related to the kind of work the student will do in an organization after completion of the program.
HMS-204	Human Services Workplace Learning Seminar II	This course builds on the learning objectives of HMS 203. These objectives will be related to the work the student will do after completion of the program.
HMS-205	Crisis Intervention	Course designed as a beginning training unit for people who anticipate or are presently working with individuals in crisis situations such as suicide, rape, spouse abuse, death and drugs. Will focus on theory and practical application of crisis intervention techniques.
HRT-101	Introductory Horticulture	Beginning horticulture students will be introduced to the biological aspects of plant life, including cell structure, anatomy, morphology, physiology and taxonomy, and to the environmental factors which affect plant growth, including light, temperature, moisture, soils and the essential elements. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-102	Soils	This course is designed to give the student an understanding of soil formation, the chemical and physical properties of natural soils and soil management. Topics include soil use as it relates to plant growth and nutrition, fertility, drainage, and soil sampling and testing. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-103	Plant Propagation	This course is designed to give students an understanding of the various methods of plant propagation. Propagation by seed as well as vegetative propagation including cutting, grafting, layering, propagation of specialized structures and tissue culture will be presented. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-104	Landscape Design I	This course is an introduction to the basic principles of landscape design. It will emphasize learning computer aided design (CAD) programs that will be utilized professionally. Traditional drafting skills will also be developed to enhance plan presentation to clients. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-105	Workplace Learning: Horticulture	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the horticultural business or institution to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum 120 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
HRT-201	Turfgrass Management	This course will cover general and special-purpose turfgrasses. Turfgrass use, establishment and management will be emphasized. The laboratory is designed to give the student basic skills in turfgrass identification, pest diagnosis and cultural management. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-205	Nursery and Garden Center Practices	This course is an overview of the nursery and garden center industries. Discussion of nursery operations will include practices from propagation through growing to final product production and distribution. Garden center topics will include merchandising, garden center layout, product trends and specialty items.
HRT-206	Ornamental Plants - Trees and Vines	This course is a study of ornamental landscape plants with an emphasis on woody vines and deciduous trees. Botanical characteristics of plants will be emphasized for identification purposes. Landscape use and plant culture will also be discussed. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-207	Ornamental Plants - Shrubs and Evergreens	This course is a study of ornamental landscape plants with an emphasis on deciduous shrubs and evergreen shrubs and trees. Botanical characteristics of plants will be emphasized for identification purposes. Landscape use and plant culture will also be discussed. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-214	Grounds Management	This course is designed to provide students the skills necessary to manage and maintain the varied aspects of landscapes in residential and commercial settings. Specific topics will include planting techniques, soil preparation, pruning, fertilizing, water and irrigation management, and other related subjects. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-217	Landscape Design II	This course is a continuation of HRT 104. Emphasis will be on applying the principles of art and design in developing landscape plans. Plant selection and use will be emphasized. CAD training will continue. Landscape construction plan details will be introduced.
HRT-218	Landscape Design III	This course is a continuation of Landscape Design II with emphasis on the application of the principles of art and design in developing landscape plans.  This class will detail conceptual and planting design and emphasize construction plans.  CAD training will continue. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-220	Landscape Irrigation	This course will provide an overview of the components, management, design and use of irrigation systems used in various landscape situations. Specific applications for turf and garden irrigation will be addressed.
HRT-227	Plant Pest Management	This course is a study of the insect and disease pests that affect ornamental plants. Emphasis is on pest identification and treatment through a knowledge of signs, symptoms and pest life cycles. Preparation for the Missouri Pesticide Applicator License is also included.
HRT-230	Ornamental Plants - Herbaceous Perennials	Students will study the uses of perennials in the landscape and the role of perennials in commercial and residential garden design.  Plant identification including specific characteristics such as growth habit, foliage and flowers will be emphasized. Gardening and cultural practice will be discussed.
HRT-235	Annuals and Vegetables	Students will be in introduced to the identification of annual landscape plants and their use in private, public and commercial gardens.  Vegetables, their identification, use and culture will also be covered.
HRT-241	Greenhouse Management	Students will learn techniques for producing a variety of ornamental crops. Greenhouse structures, and greenhouse environmental factors and their effect on plant growth will also be studied. Wholesale production and retail marketing will be presented. Special attention will be paid to the St. Louis and Midwest markets. Additional lab hours required.
HRT-242	Urban Tree Management	This course will introduce students to the management of urban forest greenspaces emphasizing the social value of urban trees, street and park tree inventories, tree ordinances and program administration. Tree selection, site evaluation, soil, planting, pruning and hazard tree evaluation will be included.
HST-101	United States History to 1865	United States History to 1865 surveys the cultural, economic, institutional, political, and social forces and events which have shaped the United States from the colonial period through the Civil War.
HST-102	United States History from 1865 to the Present	United States History from 1865 to the Present surveys the cultural, economic, institutional, political and social forces and events which have shaped the United States from the Civil War to the present.
HST-105	United States in the Twentieth Century	The United States in the Twentieth Century surveys the social, economic, political and intellectual forces which have shaped contemporary American life and institutions. This course will focus on change within America during the period 1898 to the present and will consider the effects of that change both on America and on America's relations with the rest of the world.
HST-107	The African American Experience, 1619 to the Present	The African American Experience surveys the cultural, economic, institutional, political, social forces and events that have shaped the African American experience from early American origins to the present. This course will promote a better understanding of America's past by developing increased awareness of the history of African Americans, their problems and their accomplishments both individually and as a group.
HST-115	Ancient and Medieval History to 1500	This course is a survey of the Western World with comparisons to non-Western civilizations and cultures from antiquity through the late middle ages. The course will cover ancient civilizations of the Mediterranean and the Near East; ancient Greece and Rome; the impact of Christianity, Islam, Byzantium on western heritage; and the contributions of Celtic, Germanic, and other tribal societies to a medieval western medieval heritage, as well as the development of that heritage from late antiquity to 1500 and the impact and application of these of today's world.
HST-117	Early Modern Europe	This course surveys the history of western Europe from the later Middle Ages through the French Revolution. It examines the cultural, economic, intellectual, political, religious, and social forces that shaped the Western World and its spheres of influence.
HST-119	The Modern World	This course examines the development of the "the modern world" from a variety of global perspectives, including demographics, the human impact on the environment, social transformations and the rise of gender, ethnic, and class issues and identities, the impact of warfare and political and ideological conflict, and the implications for culture of global communications networks. The course highlights the nature of changes in global frameworks and their causes and consequences, as well as comparisons among major societies.
HST-128	Western Civilization from 1500 to the Present	This course surveys the political, economic, cultural, military, and social forces that have shaped the Western World. The course also examines religious developments, overseas colonization, the Enlightenment, industrialization, imperialism, the world wars, and globalization.
HST-130	African History I	This course will deal with the history of black Africans from the time of ancient Egypt to contemporary Africa. It will be concerned with the chronological progression of African civilization, covering individuals, events and the ideas of the various periods.
HST-137	African American History through Reconstruction	A survey of African American History from its African background through the Civil War and Reconstruction. The course will investigate African-American leaders, sociocultural institutions, as well as the Black community's relationship with the larger community.
HST-138	African American History from Reconstruction to the Present	A survey of African American history from the era of Jim Crow to the present. The course will investigate African-American leaders, socio-cultural institutions, as well as the Black community's relationship with the larger community.
HST-139	British History	This course is a survey of British history from the time of Roman rule until the union of England and Scotland in 1707. Through lectures, videos, text assignments, and field trips, students will trace the historical development of the United Kingdom.
HST-141	United States History, 1945-Present	This course surveys how the end of World War II gave rise to social, cultural, intellectual, political, economic, and environmental forces that have collectively shaped American experience in the twenty-first century.
HST-201	History of East Asia	This course surveys the development of China, Japan, Korea, and Vietnam from ancient times to the present. Themes include the nature of traditional East Asian society and culture, war and revolutions, East Asia responses to political and economic challenges posed by an industrialized West, and modernization of the twentieth century.
HST-205	The United States and the Middle East, 1776-Present	This course surveys the political, economic, cultural, military, and social forces that have shaped the United States relationship with the Middle East. The course examines American involvement in the Middle East and its impact on domestic politics in the US; how US foreign policy toward the Middle East evolved over time; and the role the United States has played in shaping the political history of the Arab-Islamic world.
HST-206	Women in United States History	This course surveys the history of women in what is now the United States, beginning with the era of the first contact between Native American and Europeans to the present. The course focuses upon the ways gender, race, ethnicity, class, religion and region interacted to shape women's lives. It also surveys women's changing family, work, and social roles. The course examines women's political contributions, their quest for equality, and their role in U.S. constitutional changes over time.
HST-207	America in Vietnam	This course surveys the United States involvement in Vietnam from the end of World War II through the fall of Saigon in 1975. This course surveys the social, political, and military history of the Vietnam Era. This course also examines both United States foreign policy and domestic politics within the context of the Vietnam War.
HTM-100	Introduction to the Hospitality Industry	This course introduces the student to the business of hospitality and presents the exciting career opportunities available in one of the world's largest and most dynamic industries. It focuses on defining hospitality, introducing its various service segments, and presenting possible career paths within each segment. Entry test requirement  Test into ENG 101.
HTM-105	Professionalism in the Hospitality Industry	This course will assist potential and current hospitality employees  in developing the personal qualifications, interpersonal skills, and professional values that are in demand in the workplace.
HTM-110	Negotiations in the Hospitality Industry	This course provides practical experience in negotiation within a hospitality context. Through the use of hospitality industry specific role-plays, discussions, and writing exercises, students will develop effective and ethical negotiating skills. Students will learn how to adjust their own personal negotiating style to respond appropriately to different personalities and negotiation tactics.
HTM-115	Hospitality Customer Service and Guest Relations	This course provides the student with the basic knowledge of "service" and how it applies to managing guest relations in the hospitality industry. Service will be examined from the perspective of those who deliver it and those who manage it.
HTM-120	Supervision and Leadership in the Hospitality Industry	This course offers insight into the various aspects of supervision and leadership in the hospitality industry. Students are introduced to the functions of supervision and how it relates to all stakeholders within a hospitality organization. Supervisory roles, responsibilities, and essential supervisory skills are presented through study and practical applications.
HTM-125	Nutrition for the Culinarian	This course is an introduction to the study of nutrients in food and their effects on the human body. It explores nutrition and health, sources and functions of nutrients, food habits and customs, menu planning and food preparation.
HTM-200	Procurement in the Hospitality Industry	This course will prepare students to employ the principles of effective food, beverage, and supply purchasing necessary to support food preparation and service departments of hospitality operations. Students will be exposed to product specifications, food grading, comparative buying, and procedures associated with purchasing, receiving, issuing and inventory control using current industry technology and software.
HTM-205	Legal Aspects of Hospitality	This course is a comprehensive study of the legal issues encountered in hospitality management. Prevention and compliance are stressed to reduce potential liability in hospitality organizations. Areas of emphasis include government regulations, employment, contractual agreements, insurance, property, safety and security, food and beverage management, and guest liability.
HTM-210	Hospitality Financial Planning and Cost Control	This course introduces students to common methods of operational cost control found in the hospitality industry. Students will develop operational standards and will determine daily operational levels and break-even points. Costs of food, beverage, labor, and direct expenses are examined. Budgeting, Forecasting, Analysis and Decision Making are examined. 
HTM-215	Hospitality Sales and Marketing	This course introduces students to fundamental marketing terms, theory, and concepts that are found within the hospitality and tourism industry. Marketing is emphasized as a management philosophy that guides the design and delivery of guest services; a way of doing business. Both short and long-term marketing plans are examined with a focus on how marketing impacts every facet of the organization.
HTM-220	Hotel Facilities Management	This course covers the fundamental duties and responsibilities of a hotel's housekeeping and maintenance departments. Topics include personnel, cleaning, purchasing, equipment, textiles, maintenance, safety, and basic systems for hotel facility management.
HTM-225	Hotel Operations	This course examines the organization and management of hotel operations. It focuses on the interdependent nature of the major departments within a hotel/resort operation; rooms division, food and beverage, sales and marketing, housekeeping and maintenance, and general administration. There is a concentrated focus on front office operations and procedures.
HTM-230	Bar and Beverage Management	This course is a study of beverage service and management in a hospitality establishment. Topics include beverage knowledge, purchasing, control, marketing, legislation, staffing, service, and pairing with food. The concept of responsible alcohol beverage service is also covered and offers the student the opportunity to earn the ServSafe Alcohol certification through the National Restaurant Association.
HTM-235	Foodservice Design and Layout	This course is a survey of the basic essentials necessary for the successful layout and design of a foodservice establishment. Topics to be covered include  planning, design, selection, operation, maintenance, and layout of equipment used in various types of foodservice operations.
HTM-240	Workplace Learning: Hospitality	This experiential course provides the student opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Student will observe and participate in the functions of the Hospitality industry to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Student is required to complete a minimum of 100 hours of supervised work experience in a position related to their academic or career goal and complete six personally developed learning objectives. 
HTM-245	Event Planning I	This course provides students with a practical overview of the many factors that must be considered in the planning and execution of successful meetings and special events. Students will be exposed to program goals and objectives; basic budget questions; destination options and venue considerations; transportation options; food and beverage decisions; speaker and entertainment selection; and other critical aspects of event planning.
HTM-250	Event Planning II	This course exposes students to the business side of special events including concepts and strategies. Students will examine how to leverage suppliers and vendors, process written proposals, determine management fees, negotiate contracts, encompass safety and security factors, and utilize state-of-the-art technologies that will enhance the meeting or event's effectiveness and enjoyment.
HTM-255	Event Planning III	This course utilizes the acquired knowledge from Event Planning I and II by requiring students to research, plan, design, and construct a mock event from start to finish. Students will have a hands-on opportunity to develop sound skills and abilities in the compilation of a presentation representing a realistic meeting or special event.
HTM-260	Travel and Tourism Foundations	This course is designed to provide non-automated, foundational knowledge for those entering the travel and tourism industry. Students will learn the codes, terms, definitions, organizations, resources, and important concepts that pertain to the various segments of the industry.
HTM-265	Travel and Tourism Destination Geography	This course explores common destinations from a travel and tourism perspective. Students will study the physical environment, climate, people, manmade and natural attractions, traveler preparation, transportation, and accommodations associated with these destinations. 
HTM-270	Travel and Tourism Computer Systems	This course is designed to provide automated, foundational knowledge for those entering the travel and tourism industry. Students will learn the basics of using select computer systems and the Internet for the acquisition of travel information, the construction of travel arrangements, and the collection and use of customer data for marketing purposes.
HUM-101	Humanities: Pre-History to 1600	This course explores the development of Western culture from its beginnings to the early modern period. Its focus is on the basic attitudes, feelings and ideas expressed in art music, literature, philosophy, and religion. A major objective of the course is to help students to understand and appreciate some of the iconic literature, art and music of Western culture.
HUM-102	Humanities: 1600 to the Present	This course explores the development of Western culture from the Early Modern Era (circa 1600) to the present. The focus of the course is the attitudes, emotions and ideas manifested in or expressed by the art, architecture, music, philosophy, literature and religion as they develop from the 17th century to the present. The course will trace the development of classical and popular music, art, literature and philosophy, and especially the growing impact of science on the arts, music and ideas of the last 150 years. Throughout the course, special attention is given to the social and historical context in which the art, music and ideas were/are created.
HUM-106	Black Humanities	This course is an examination of the development of ideas expressed in art, music, literature, philosophy, education, psychology, sociology, and religion of the African Diaspora, Several academic areas will be explored from an Afrocentric perspective to stimulate an interest and kindle a passion for further study. Cultural styles of the African disapora are explored in the local, global, and intercultural contexts.
HUM-109	Arts and Ideas in the Ancient World	This humanities course uses the visual arts and literature to trace the development of belief systems from the earliest expressions found in prehistoric remains through the rise of the great civilizations of Egypt, Greece and Rome.
HUM-110	The Middle Ages and the Renaissance	This humanities course explores the arts and ideas, including philosophies and religions, that infused and created the cultural periods known as the Middle Ages and Renaissance in Western Europe, and the ways in which these arts and ideas represented the visible and/or audible expression of the human condition.
HUM-112	Creative Thinking	This interdisciplinary course helps students develop their capacities to observe clearly, to generate ideas and alternatives, to overcome blocks to recognize and solve problems, and to assess results. The skills taught apply to all arts and sciences, to business, and to personal interests.
HUM-113	Introduction to Irish Studies	This course is a survey of Irish history, literature, and culture from prehistoric times to the present. The role of the arts in the struggle for independence and the outstanding achievements of Irish writers and poets as well as the global importance of the Irish diaspora is emphasized. 
HUM-115	Life and Death During the Nazi Era	An interdisciplinary approach to the study of life in Nazi Germany. Literary, psychological and historical texts on such topics as education, racial prejudice and propaganda are read and interpreted in class. Supplementary slides and documentary films are used.
HUM-208	Liberal Arts Seminar: Themes in the Liberal Arts	The seminar will draw together the main themes of a liberal arts education  the consideration of the impact of science, technology and the humanities on societies over time, values and ethics appropriate to a new age, the future consequences of present policies, the enjoyment and importance of both the arts and the sciences. The theme may change semester by semester.
IB-100	International Business	An introduction to various facets of international business, from marketing to the completion of shipment. Emphasis is placed on terminology and the importance of understanding cross-cultural differences.
IDS-102	Urban Legends and American Society	This course allows students to explore and study urban legends in American society as well as the various contexts in which these myths are placed. Students have the opportunity to interpret the symbolic and social significance of urban legends as well as analyze its shaping and criticism of American Society.
IDS-103	Topics in Arab Culture	Fiction and non-fiction literature is examined to analyze current issues, evaluate scenarios and propose creative solutions to educational, social and political events in Arab countries and the Arab diaspora. Multiple roles, concepts and expectations of citizenship are introduced. The roots of Arab educational, social and current political issues are examined to establish context.
IDS-104	Equity in Education	Fiction and non-fiction texts are examined to explore the U.S. education experience in past and present educational settings. Equity in educational settings and experiences is examined. Teaching and learning theory and leading educational philosophies are introduced and compared to literature-based interpretations. Prerequistes  	Reading Proficiency	.	
IDS-105	Law Goes to the Movies	This interdisciplinary course explores important themes in the study of law by comparing scholarly/quantitative work, against representations of these themes in cinema. The course explores legal themes through multiple perspectives, including comparison of scholarly research, communication methods, and psychology. These approaches will provide opportunities for students to gain insight into how films are a cultural vehicle for representation or misrepresentation of lawyers and the legal process.
IDS-106	The Artist in Society	This course focuses on cultivating habits of mind by examining significant developments in western thought through the lenses of the artists who have reflected those developments and/or contributed to them. Through integration and exploration of the arts within historical contexts, development of culture, and communication theory, students examine the impact of the arts on the beliefs, values, and behaviors of individuals and society.
IDS-107	Representations of Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. Society	Students will explore representation of race, class, gender, sexuality, and disability in American films, television programs, animation, music, journalism, advertisements, and other mediated culture products, from the early 20th century to the present. Students will analyze the ideological functions of mediated communication and rhetorical methods present in mediated representations of people and ideas. Students will also examine theories concerning the formation and maintenance of social hierarchies, and the ways individuals interact with media images.
IDS-108	Movement Culture of 1960s America	This course explores and analyzes the various aspects of politics and culture from multiple perspectives during the period surrounding and including the 1960s. Through research, exploration and analysis, this course focuses on politics, literature, history, film, and music and the various themes which characterized those years and the ways in which that decade shaped and changed American society.
IDS-109	Global Dimensions of Race, Ethnicity and Religion in America	This course introduces students to global processes influencing and shaping race/ethnicity, gender and religion in the American experience. Students will study the historical layers of cultural, economic and political interaction between the continents of Africa, Asia, Europe, South America, and North America that have influenced and shaped the role of race/ethnicity, gender, and religion in American history and in the modern nation.
IDS-112	Sex Trafficking in Global Perspective	Sex trafficking is a complex social problem with multiple contributing factors both in the United States and on a global level. Interrelated inequities in gender, sex, power, class, opportunity, education, culture politics, race and sexual objectification are among the social phenomena that contribute to sex trafficking. This course examines dynamics of sex trafficking on a local and global level, drawing from interdisciplinary sources and presenting a variety of perspectives.
IDS-113	Global Encounters in the Visual Arts	This course explores how globalization is manifest in contemporary art and visual culture from around the world. It examines connections between globalization and political, economic, cultural and aesthetic theories in the name of building an awareness of contemporary art as a facet of today's global society.
IDS-114	Leadership in the 21st Century	This course offers students the unique opportunity to explore the complex concept of leadership from multiple perspectives, from understanding personal values to understanding the responsibilities of being a global citizen. This interdisciplinary course will include the detailed study of the leadership theories, concepts and skills.
IDS-115	The Science and Value of Happiness	What makes people happy and why? Through counseling, psychological and biological approaches to the study of happiness, this course examines personal values, the values of others, and how those values influence choice, lifestyle and behavior. The ability to critique the cultural, moral and ethical implications of being happy and how this relates to overall well-being, citizenship and personal growth is developed.
IDS-116	Historical, Social, and Cultural Constructions of Youth	This course examines historical, social, and cultural constructions of youth in discourse, including texts created about, for, and by girls, boys, and teens. This course also exposes students to the primary theoretical frameworks and methodological approaches developed by Youth Studies scholars to analyze media texts and youth cultures, focusing primarily on research in the social sciences, gender studies, literary criticism, and cultural studies.
IDS-117	Sport and Society	This course focuses on the many ways the problems in sports reflect larger issues of culture, socializations, capitalism, race and gender within society. These topics are opportunities for students to utilize academic research, examine effective rhetorical strategies, and argue positions.
IDS-118	Environmental Conflicts and Consequences	This course explores systemic causes and implications of environmental threats. This course examines the roles of government, industry, and community in addressing environmental problems, with particular emphasis on environmental justice. It devotes particular attention to sociological and historical perspectives.
IDS-119	Reel Life vs. Real Life: Movies, History, and Historical Truth	In this course, students analyze and evaluate how films communicate historical personalities and events, and compare that expression with the presentation of history through written accounts. Through multiple perspectives, and discipline specific criteria, student ultimately consider how history and film attempt to illuminate both the past and the "truth" for "audiences" of the present.
IDS-120	Science, Sci-Fi, Society and Cinema	In this course, students utilize the basic language and analytical criteria of both Science and Cinema to investigate the portrayal of science and scientist in cinema. Portrayals real and imagined are explored to investigate dualities and how the quest for knowledge can lead to consequences and catalyst not so "scientifically detached" - at least not on film.
IRT-101	Principles of Judicial Reporting I	This course introduces the student to the role of the reporter in trials, depositions, and administrative hearings. All phases of format and design are taught as it pertains to the production of trials, depositions, and administrative hearings. The student will receive instruction in reference materials, related jobs, NCRA Code of Professional Conduct, and basic proofreading techniques.
IRT-138	Introduction to Computer-Aided Transcription	This course introduces the student to the Computer-Aided Transcription (CAT) software and gives instruction in the operation of a computer hardware data input device for the creation of a legal document and the development of the dictionaries for their use.
IRT-140	Legal Terminology	This course will teach the student the meaning of legal and Latin terms. It will also cover instruction on civil and criminal law, the judicial system (including discovery, trial, and appellate processes), the legislative process, hearings, and arbitrations, research and citations, and the notary public law.
IRT-142	Editing of Legal Documents	This course covers the basic rules of English grammar, punctuation, spelling, numbers, capitalization, vocabulary development, proofreading of the spoken word, and the transcription of legal documents.
IRT-169	Information Reporting I	This course introduces the student to the basic computer-compatible theory for writing on the stenotype machine. The student will develop the ability to write words and sentences.
IRT-170	Information Reporting II	This course completes the introduction of the computer-compatible theory for writing on the stenotype machine. The student will continue to develop their ability to write testimony material up to speeds of 60 wpm with 95% accuracy.
IRT-171	Information Reporting III	This course covers speedbuilding of literary, testimony, and jury charge material with emphasis on accurate transcription. The student will build speed to 100 wpm on testimony, 80 wpm on jury charge, and 60 wpm on literary.
IRT-172	Information Reporting IV	This course continues to cover speedbuilding of literary, testimony, and jury charge material with emphasis on accurate transcription. The student will build speed to 140 wpm on testimony, 120 wpm on jury charge, and 100 wpm on literary.
IRT-173	Information Reporting V	This course continues to cover speedbuilding on literary, testimony, medical testimony, and jury charge material with emphasis on accurate transcription. The student will build speed to 180 wpm on testimony, 160 wpm on medical testimony, 160 wpm on jury charge, and 120 wpm on literary.
IRT-174	Information Reporting VI	This course continues to cover speedbuilding on literary, testimony, medical testimony, and jury charge material with emphasis on accurate transcription. The student will build speed to 225 wpm on testimony, 200 wpm on medical testimony, 200 wpm on jury charge and 180 wpm on literary.
IRT-201	Principles of Judicial Reporting II	This course covers advanced phases of formatting, design, and creating include pages to be inserted in trial, deposition and administrative hearing. The student will receive advanced instruction on developing and using parenthetical phrases, punctuating the spoken word and proofreading techniques. This course will prepare students to be able to produce transcripts for civil, criminal, worker's compensation and federal court.
IRT-253	Workplace Learning: Judicial Reporting	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the function of the Judicial reporter to enhance the preparation for entering the field. The student shall complete 50 verified hours of actual writing time during the internship.
IRT-257	Advanced Computer-Aided Transcription	This course will introduce the student to the advanced applications of the Computer-Aided Transcription (CAT) software for information reporting technology. The student will learn about videotaping in depositions for trial purposes and litigation support.
IS-101	Keyboarding	This course is designed for the beginning student to develop touch control of the keyboard, to use proper techniques, to build skill to a minimum of 25 words per minute for one minute. Emphasis is on learning the alphabet, numeric, and symbol keys and on building basic skill. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading. Additional practice hours may be required.	
IS-102	Keyboarding and Formatting	Students learn to develop touch control of the keyboard, proper keyboarding techniques, and to apply basic formatting skills to letters, memos, reports, and tables.	
IS-103	Information Systems for Business	A study of computers and information systems for business functions. Topics include computer technology and its impact on business organization, role of people in an information system environment, programming fundamentals, information systems and the computer in solving business management problems. Credit not allowed for this course if credit is given for IS 100.
IS-109	Proofreading and Editing	Students learn to produce high-quality business communications through proofreading for accuracy in mechanics, format, and content as well as edit documents for correctness, conciseness, and clarity.
IS-112	Software and Hardware Concepts	This course is a survey of technical topics related to computer systems with emphasis on the relationships between hardware architecture and systems software. Binary and hexadecimal number systems, data representation, data structures, processor architecture, and operating systems functions and methods will be explored.
IS-116	Computer Literacy	This course explores the terminology and concepts of computers including file management, Internet browsers, and web page development. Students gain proficiency using productivity tools such as word processors, presentation software, electronic spreadsheets and electronic mail to solve problems, communicate, and manage information to make informed decisions. Students will also develop a computer application.
IS-118	Computer Applications-Databases	This course focuses on the use of a relational database system on the computer with business and personal applications. Additional lab time may be required.
IS-119	Computer Applications-Word Processing	This class is an introduction to word processing using a current software program. Included in this course are the basic functions of creating, formatting, editing, and printing documents. Additional lab hours may be required.
IS-122	Windows	Terminology and concepts of the Windows interface will be covered. File management and organization, managing programs, and installing and uninstalling applications are also covered.
IS-123	Introduction to Windows	Students learn the basic concepts of the Windows environment and how to create and manage files within the organizational structure of that environment. The desktop, accessories, and navigational tools will also be covered.	
IS-124	Windows-Advanced	Students learn about the Windows operating system in-depth. Installing, running, and uninstalling Windows applications and optimizing performance of the Windows operating system will be covered.
IS-125	Excel for Windows	This course introduces the use of Excel for applications in business, involving topics which include formatting worksheets, calculating data with formulas and functions, analyzing financial data, designing tables and charts, and working with macros.
IS-129	HTML	This course covers the essentials of creating web pages using Hypertext Markup Language (HTML) and Cascading Style Sheets (CSS). Students will create and edit basic pages which include text, links, and images. HTML and CSS will be used to control page appearance and layout. Recommended preparation  IS 123 or equivalent experience.
IS-130	Hardware and Software Support	This course covers the theory and hands-on skills necessary to pass the CompTIA A+ exam. Topics covered include hardware fundamentals, networking and security. Students will learn basic operating system functionality and troubleshooting methodology, the practice of proper safety procedures, and how to effectively interact with customers and co-workers. Basic computer literacy is expected.
IS-131	Advanced HTML	This course covers advanced web page creation in this continuation of IS 129, Hypertext Markup Language (HTML). The student is introduced to advanced techniques of HTML and Cascading Style Sheets (CSS). Students will create and edit web pages which include forms, imagemaps, audio, video, and Application Program Interfaces (API). Additional advanced topics identified by industry and World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) standards may be explored. HTML editors and converters will be presented and may be utilized.
IS-132	Windows-Intermediate	This course is a continuation of Introduction to Windows. Students will become more familiar with the Windows interface and will learn how to manage and manipulate programs, files, folders and objects.
IS-136	Internet Fundamentals	This course provides practical information regarding Internet practices and safety. Searching, validating, and securely passing information to and from the Internet are emphasized. Identifying and mitigating common threads such as spyware, viruses, Trojan Horses, and identity theft are covered.
IS-139	Web Publishing	This course introduces current industry standards for web development and design techniques that include the use of Hypertext Markup Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), and an introduction to JavaScript. Topics such as web development process, accessibility standards, platform standards, HTML editors and converters, Web 2.0 Technologies, performance issues, tables, forms, dynamic content, and web site management issues will be presented. 
IS-141	Graphics for the Web	This course focuses on generating graphics that can be utilized within the context of the Internet. Topics will include use of graphics at the appropriate times, performance issues, button creation, animated graphics, and multimedia tools.
IS-142	Web Development I	This course is an in-depth study of the development and implementation of engaging websites using current industry production tools. Accessibility, security, and website management issues will be addressed. Topics such as file formats, platform standards, user-centered navigation, dynamic content such as streaming video/audio, and search engine concepts will be presented.
IS-151	Computer Applications in Business	This course covers software programs frequently used in the business environment. Word processing, spreadsheets, database management, and presentation software will be introduced.
IS-152	Computer Applications in Business-Intermediate	This class is a continuation of Computer Applications in Business (IS 151). Software packages from these categories will be studied: spreadsheets, database management, word processing, and presentation software. 
IS-153	C# Programming I	This course emphasizes software development problem-solving methodologies utilizing current software design and development tools and techniques. Topics include data structures, program design, pseudocode, language control structures, procedures and functions, error handling and Object Oriented design using classes. Assignments will be developed in the C# language using the current development environment.
IS-154	Web-Based Productivity Applications	Learn to use web-based applications utilized to enter, retrieve, and update data. Web-based collaboration tools, online file management, and cloud computing will also be covered. 
IS-156	Computer Applications-Intermediate Databases	This course is a continuation of IS 118. Student will learn about action queries, inner/outer joins, mail merge, importing and exporting specifications, queries that "prompt" for criteria, and additional formatting techniques for reports. Macros will also be introduced.
IS-157	Computer Applications-Intermediate Word Processing	This class is a continuation of IS 119. The students will merge documents, create and sort tables, insert images, utilize drawing objects, use special formatting features, and prepare charts and web pages. In addition, students will create basic macros and integrate/import other applications into documents.
IS-161	Computer Applications: Advanced Word Processing	This class is a continuation of IS 157. Additional emphasis will be placed on advanced word processing features. Students will create advanced macros, style sheets, outlines, master documents, fill-in forms, table of contents, and shared documents.
IS-165	Computer Applications-Microsoft Project	This course introduces students to the Microsoft Project software application. Microsoft Project allows students, professionals, volunteers, or an individual managing or working on a project to organize all the details of a project into one central repository.
IS-187	Java Programming I	In this course students learn software development problem-solving methodologies utilizing current software design and development tools and techniques and also receive an introduction to the Java programming language. Topics include data structures, program design, pseudocode, language control structures, procedures and functions, error handling and Object Oriented design using classes. Assignments are developed in Java using a current integrated development environment (IDE). Basic computer literacy expected.
IS-200	Electronic Records Management	Students learn database management and records management procedures from creation through processing, maintenance, retention, retrieval, protection, and disposition. Electronic and manual filing rules are covered and alphabetic, numeric, subject, and geographic filing methods are emphasized.
IS-205	Medical Terminology	This course provides a broad survey of the language of medicine and health technologies. Students learn to accurately spell and define common medical terms related to major disease processes, diagnostic procedures, laboratory tests, abbreviations, drugs, and treatment modalities. Emphasis is placed on formation, definition and pronunciation. (Same as HIT 101).
IS-209	Computer Applications - Advanced	This course covers integration techniques used to share information between computer applications. Templates, workgroup features, scripting, and other time-saving techniques are explored to enable students to work with greater efficiency. Case studies and independent projects provide practical experience in the development and implementation of business models.
IS-210	Office Technology and Procedures	Students learn effective business communication techniques, processing of information via technology, and coordination of office information. Human relations skills and computer-based tools are emphasized.
IS-214	Spreadsheet Macros and Advanced Topics	This course will cover more complex functions of spreadsheets including financial tools and analysis, connecting to external data sets, database functions and queries, and collaboration.
IS-225	Database Management	This course will cover the concepts, skills, methodology, and database technology necessary to design and implement a relational database management system. Topics include relational databases, data structures, relational data modeling and design using current industry techniques and tools. This course emphasizes Structures Query Language (SQL) commands to create a relational database.
IS-229	Unix/Linux I	This course introduces the Unix/Linux operating system with special focus on the organization and maintenance of the file system. Students are also introduced to basic installation and configuration of the operating system and will build and troubleshoot a stand-alone Unix/Linux machine. Course objectives align with the Linux Professional Institute Level 1 certification and emphasize command line process. Basic computer literacy is expected.
IS-237	Fundamentals of Information Assurance/Security	This course examines fundamentals of network security involved in creating and managing secure computer network environments. Both hardware and software topics are considered, including authentication methods, remote access, network security architectures and devices, cryptography, forensics and disaster recovery plans. This course serves as a preparation basis for CompTIA Security+ exam. 
IS-240	SQL and Database Development	This course covers the concepts of Structured Query Language (SQL) and database development. Students learn how to create tables, views and indexes. Managing and formatting data, developing queries and sub-queries and advanced reporting are presented. Students learn how to develop, manage and implement database control and connectivity techniques.
IS-241	Systems Analysis and Design	This course covers the concepts, skills, methodologies, techniques and perspectives essential to analyze and design information systems. Visual and emerging development tools are used to focus on object-oriented and visual development of information systems. Additional lab time may be required.
IS-246	Visual Basic Programming	This course is a comprehensive introduction to Visual Basic, one of Microsoft's object-oriented development tools. Topics covered include language syntax, logic and flow control, data structures, procedures and functions, arrays, event and exception handling, files and database connectivity. Object-oriented principles will be emphasized, including the design and coding of classes.
IS-253	C# Programming II	This course focuses on broadening and deepening the student's understanding of Object Oriented Programming (OOP) as implemented in the C# language. Core elements include creating and deploying Windows programs, form application basics, building user interfaces using basic techniques, .NET fundamentals, basic coding withe the .NET framework, design and development of classes, overloading and overriding methods and constructors, inheritance, encapsulation and interfaces. Course objectives align with the Microsoft Certified Technical Specialist (MCTS) .NET Framework, Windows Applications certification.
IS-255	Advanced Visual Basic Programming	This course continues Visual Basic Programming focusing on enterprise-level development techniques and tools, including web interfaces. Students participate in a multi-component development project, deploying it in a multi-tier server installation typical of business environments. Topics include advanced database processing, object-oriented component architecture, server-side coding for business processes, and multi-threading.
IS-256	C++ Programming	This course introduces the C++ programming language. Topics include language syntax, logic and flow control, data types and structures, files, pointers, system and user defined functions, arrays, recursion, and the use of libraries. Object-oriented principles are emphasized, including the design and coding of classes and class objects.
IS-257	Advanced Database Design	This course is a continuation of the database design course covering implementation concepts such as n-tier architectures, middleware, SQL functionality, distributed databases, data warehousing and cloud computing. The course focusses on application of both theory and practice. Additional lab time may be required.
IS-264	Unix/Linux II	This course prepares students to perform basic Unix/Linux systems administration and network installation tasks. Students will be introduced to the design, configuration, and installation of system services along with management and automation of those services through shell scripting. System security will also be covered. Course objectives align with the Linux Professional Institute Level 1 certification.
IS-265	Web Scripting Technologies	This course presents current and emerging scripting technologies used for development of state-of-the-art websites and other applications. The primary focus is on client-side technologies. Students will use a variety of technologies in this project-oriented class.
IS-268	SQL Server Programming	This course is an in-depth study of Microsoft SQL Server programming. Students learn the advanced features of SQL Server to interact with the database and other applications. Advanced techniques such as database cursors, triggers and stored procedures, SQL Server Data Tools and SQL Server Reporting Services are presented. In addition, students gain the essential knowledge and skills in collecting, analyzing, interpreting and presenting information obtained from multiple data sources.
IS-269	SQL Server Applications Programming	This course covers the development of Graphical User Interface (GUI) database applications in Microsoft Visual Studio and SQL Server environment. Students learn to use Microsoft Visual Studio and professional .NET developer tools to develop web-based data-driven applications. Practical solutions for typical business situations are presented, demonstrated and developed in a lab environment.
IS-272	Oracle Database Administration	This course covers the activities performed while administering an Oracle database.  Students will be installing and customizing the database, perform backup and recovery procedures, apply database tuning techniques and implement database security methods. Students will be exposed to real world examples of the various tasks that a DBA will perform on a daily basis.  Additional lab time may be required.
IS-273	Oracle Design and Implementation	This course covers the concepts, fundamental issues and techniques for the design and development of an Oracle database. Students will be exposed to all the phases and tasks of the design process, including business modeling, conceptual and physical modeling strategies in developing application systems in Oracle. Requirements of data warehouse design and implementation will be discussed along with design methods for distributed database and Web-based applications. Students will gain hands-on experience in Oracle designer tools.
IS-275	Advanced C++ Programming	This course is a continuation of IS 256, covering database connectivity, object-oriented data structures, sorting, searching, exception handling, and the Standard Template Library. The creation and use of classes will be emphasized including the principles of inheritance and polymorphism. GUI technologies will be explored, including the development of web interfaces.
IS-276	Oracle Programming	This course is an in-depth study of Oracle structured query language (SQL) and procedural language (PL/SQL). Students will learn the advanced features of SQL and PL/SQL to interact with the database and other applications. Advanced techniques such as control structures, cursors, database triggers, functions, stored procedures and packaging will be presented.
IS-277	Oracle Applications Programming	This course covers the development of data-driven web-based applications in Oracle. Students will learn the Oracle data-centric rapid application development tools such as Oracle Application Express (APEX) to develop and deploy fast and secure web applications. Practical solutions for typical business situations will be discussed, demonstrated and developed in a lab environment.
IS-278	Oracle Database Security and Administration	This course covers the activities performed while administering an Oracle database. Students install and customize the Oracle database, configure the Oracle Network environment, manage database storage structures, perform database backup and recovery, monitor transactions and resolve locking conflicts, administer users and implement database security. Additional lab hours may be required.
IS-279	Oracle Tuning and Performance	This course is designed to provide an in-depth overview of Oracle's internal structures and show how to tune Oracle's internal structures for maximum high performance. Students learn how to use a variety of Oracle tools and automatic tuning features to diagnose and tune the Oracle Instance components. Additional lab hours may be required.
IS-283	C# Programming III	Students in this course focus on completing the acquisition of the knowledge and skills for developing applications using Windows Forms, Windows Presentation Foundation (WPF) and the 
IS-287	Java Programming II	This course focuses on broadening and deepening the student's understanding of Object Oriented Programming (OOP) as implemented in the Java language. Core elements include design and development of classes, overloading and overriding methods and constructors, inheritance, encapsulation, and interfaces. Course objectives align with Oracle's Certified Professional, Java SE Programmer certification.
IS-288	Java Programming III	Students in this course complete their understanding of core java concepts required for Oracle's Java SE Programmer certification. Java web development utilizing the Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern with Java Server Pages (JSP) and Servlets is also examined. Mobile access to web applications is introduced, and secure coding principles are emphasized.
IS-290	C# Frameworks: .NET Web App Framework	Students expand their C# development skills and gain the knowledge and skills required to design and develop Web applications by using the latest version of the Microsoft .NET framework and Microsoft Visual Studio. This course aligns with the Designing and Developing Web Applications by using Microsoft .NET framework certification.
IS-291	Workplace Learning: Information Systems	This course consists of a workplace assignment with an employer or agency (minimum of 150 hours during the semester), which allows the student to apply skills learned in the classroom. Students will have the opportunity to learn new skills and to explore career possibilities while supervised by the employer and a faculty member. This course is appropriate for students nearing completion of their IS degree program.
IS-294	Java Frameworks: Struts and Hibernate	In this course student expand their Java development skills by learning popular Java frameworks and tools for rapid application development of enterprise-level systems. The main focus is on Struts, the Java Persistence Interface (JPA) using Hibernate, and Enterprise Java Beans (EJB). This course aligns with the Oracle Certified Expert - Java EE Enterprise Javabeans certification.
IS-295	Java Mobile Applications Development	This course focuses on java technologies and techniques for developing mobile applications for cell phones and other "smart" devices. The course aligns with Oracle's Java ME Mobile Application Developer certification.
IS-296	Java Frameworks: Spring	This course focuses on the popular Java Spring Framework as a tool for rapid development of enterprise level systems. The integration of Spring with other frameworks such as Struts and Hibernate will also be examined. This course aligns with the SpringSource certification for the Core Spring Developer exam.
IT-100	Introduction to Cybersecurity	This course introduces the people, products, and processes that protect electronic data from those with malicious intent. This course will introduce students to various experts who discuss the concepts of cybersecurity including what it is, why it is important, and some of the products and processes that they use to secure data. Connections between the required courses in the Cybersecurity Program will be explored. The opportunities within this growing field will be covered. This course is not intended to teach students to implement security products and processes, but rather to make students aware of the global need for cybersecurity and the advancement in this industry. Cybersecurity requires a basic understanding of networking concepts. Supplemental information and activities for specific networking concepts are included where needed throughout the course.
IT-101	Cisco Networking Academy I: Introduction to Networks	This course focuses on learning the fundamentals of networking. Practical and conceptual skills that build the foundation for understanding basic networking will be covered. This is the first of four (4) courses as preparation for the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) certification as well as the first of two (2) courses as preparation for the Cisco Certified Entry Networking Technician (CCENT).
IT-102	Desktop Client Support	This course prepares students to take the Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist exam for Windows Configuration, 70-680. Students will learn to implement, administer, and troubleshoot the Microsoft Windows client operating system. Topics include installation, upgrades, restoration, user profiles and accounts, and the TCP/IP protocol. Basic computer literacy is expected.
IT-103	Help Desk Principles	This course focuses on key information and skills for user support professionals, including troubleshooting and problem solving, communicating successfully with clients, performing end-user needs analysis and assessment, and training end-users. With balanced coverage of both people skills and technical skills, this course is an excellent resource for those in or preparing for the technical support field.
IT-120	Enterprise Security Management	This course examines managerial aspects of computer security and assurance for enterprises. Topics include risk management, contingency planning, access control models, and information security governance including FISMA compliance, program assessment and metrics. The student will acquire knowledge of accreditation, certification, procurement and operating principles for secure computing systems.
IT-121	Secure E-Commerce and E-Government	This course examines the principles and techniques for secure electronic commerce and secure electronic government. Topics include cryptography, certification authorities, public key infrastructure, biometrics, digital signatures, and legal and national policy issues surrounding e-commerce and e-government. Students also develop an e-commerce website using current industry tools.
IT-140	Windows Server Configuring Active Directory	This course covers the design, implementation, and management of Microsoft's Active Directory in a distributed network environment under Windows Server. It prepares the student to take the current Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist exam 70-640.
IT-142	Windows Server Configuring Infrastructure	In this course the student is taught how to design, implement, manage, and troubleshoot a distributed network under Microsoft's Windows Server Operating System. The installation of primary network services and connectivity from the desktop will be covered. This course prepares students for the Microsoft Certified Technology Specialist exam, 70-642.
IT-201	Cisco Networking Academy II: Routing and Switching Essentials	This course focuses on the architecture, components and operations of routers and switches in a small network. Configuration and troubleshooting routers and switches for basic functionality will be covered. This is the second of four (4) courses offered as preparation for the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) certification exam as well as the second of two (2) courses as preparation for the Cisco Certified Entry Networking Technician (CCENT).
IT-202	Cisco Networking Academy III: Scaling Networks	This course focuses on hierarchical network design, redundant network implementation, first-hop redundancy protocols, and enhanced-switching technologies, spanning tree protocols, IPv4/IPv6 OSPF and EIGRP routing. Basic wireless configuration and concepts are introduced. This is the third of four (4) courses as preparation for the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) certification.
IT-203	Cisco Networking Academy IV: Connecting Networks	The course focuses on WAN technologies including PPP, Frame Relay, broadband links, WAN security concepts, and mitigation of common security threats. The course explains the principles of traffic control and access control lists (ACLs), and describes the implementation of IP addressing services (NAT, DHCP), and IPv6 addressing concepts. During the course, students learn how to detect, troubleshoot, and correct common Enterprise network implementation issues. This is the fourth of four (4) courses as preparation for the Cisco Certified Network Associate (CCNA) certification.
IT-204	Cisco CCNP: R&S ROUTE	This course provides preparation for students seeking the Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP) certification. Knowledge and skills necessary to implement scalable and highly secure Cisco routers will be covered. Course activities and assignments will help students to prepare for the current Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP)-R&S ROUTE and the Cisco Certified Design Professional (CCDP) certifications.
IT-206	Cisco CCNP: R&S SWITCH	This course provides preparation for students seeking the Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP) certification. Knowledge and skills necessary to plan, configure and verify the implementation of complex enterprise switching solutions will be covered. Course activities and assignments will help students to prepare for the current Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP) - R&S SWITCH and the Cisco Certified Design Professional (CCDP) certifications. 
IT-207	Cisco CCNP: R&S TSHOOT	This course provides preparation for students seeking the Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP) certification. Knowledge and skills necessary to troubleshoot and maintain complex enterprise routed and switched Cisco IP Networks will be covered. Course activities and assignments will help students to prepare for the current Cisco Certified Network Professional (CCNP) - R&S TSHOOT and the Cisco Certified Design Professional (CCDP) certifications.
IT-208	Cisco Networking Academy: CCNA Security	This course focuses on network security processes emphasizing hands-on skills for  security policy design and management, security technologies, security products and solutions, firewall and secure router design, installation, configuration, maintenance, Authentication , Authorization, and Accounting (AAA) implementation using routers and firewalls, securing the network at the Open Systems Interconnection (OSI) layers 2 and 3, stressing documentation, design, and installation.
IT-210	Firewall and VPN Security	This course focuses on security solutions and processes in a network with emphasis on practical skills in the following areas  firewall, Intrusion Prevention (IPS) and VPN design, implementation, configuration and maintenance using ASA and PIX Security Appliance.
IT-211	Introduction to Virtualization and Cloud Computing	This course explores the installation, configuration and management of virtualization tools, including  VMware vSphere using ESX/ESXi and vCenterServer and/or other leading virtualization solutions. Completion of this hands-on course prepares students to obtain recognized industry certifications, including the VMWare Certified Associate and VMWare Certified Professional.
IT-212	Ethical Hacking	This course examines the background, history, and theory of ethical hacking. Hands-on activities using practical applications and real-life simulations to practice hacking techniques and methodologies will be used to find and attempt to exploit vulnerabilities of an organization's network infrastructure. Best countermeasures will be determined to improve security policies to protect information resources in an effort to minimize or eliminate any potential attacks. Communication skills and techniques for the cybersecurity workplace are emphasized throughout the course. This course serves as preparation for the EC-Council Ethical Hacking certification exam.
IT-214	Systems Security Engineering	This course prepares the student to identify, evaluate, and prioritize potential threats, and manage and mitigate threats through risk management concepts, assessment activities, and monitoring terminology, techniques, and systems. Students will gain skills to properly respond to a security incident or forensic investigation with incident handling processes and procedures such as Business Continuity Planning (BPC) and Disaster Recovery Planning (DRP).
IT-216	Digital Forensics	Digital crime scene investigation practices and digital evidence capture, documentation, validation and preservation techniques are taught through in-depth participatory exercises. Steganography, mobile data acquisition, network monitoring, decryption, manual and automated file and password recovery techniques are taught.
IT-235	Network Infrastructure Design	This course covers the skills and knowledge necessary for network design engineers. Topics include design of routed and switched network infrastructures and services involving LAN, WAN, and broadband access for organizations, including service virtualization. The Enterprise Composite Model facilitates planning, design, implementation, operation and optimization (PDIOO) through modular design and the relations between modules.
IT-240	Windows Server: Installation and Configuration	This course is part one in a series of three courses that provides the skills and knowledge necessary to implement a core Windows Server Infrastructure in an enterprise environment. Students will get hands-on instruction and practice installing and configuring Windows Server. This course maps to the Microsoft Certified Solutions Associate Windows Server 2012 certification exam 70-410.
IT-241	Windows Server: Administration	This course is part two in a series of three courses that provides the skills and knowledge necessary to implement a core Windows Server infrastructure in an enterprise environment. Students will get hands-on instruction and practice administering Windows Server. This course maps to the Microsoft Certified Solutions Associate Windows Server 2012 certification exam 70-411.
IT-242	Windows Server: Advanced Services Configuration	This course is part three in a series of three courses that provides the skills and knowledge necessary to implement a core Windows Server infrastructure in an enterprise environment. Students will get hands-on instruction and practice configuring advanced services in Windows Server. This courser maps to the Microsoft Certified Solutions Associate Windows Server 2012 certification exam 70-412.
IT-246	Windows Server Administration	This course covers the design, implementation, and management of network services using Microsoft's Windows Server in a distributed networking environment. This course prepares the student to take the Microsoft Certified IT Professional (MCITP) exam, 70-646.
ITL-103	Elementary Italian I	Students in this beginning course develop the grammatical knowledge and communicative skills necessary to participate in elementary Italian conversation and to read short passages. Students also explore the richness of historical and contemporary Italian culture.
ITL-104	Elementary Italian II	In this continuation of ITL 103, students continue their study of the basic elements of Italian grammar, increase their vocabulary and enhance their ability to read and communicate in Italian. Students enhance their global and intercultural competency through increased fluency in the language and a deeper exploration of historical and contemporary Italian culture.
JPN-101	Modern Japanese I	This course focuses on the construction and practice of fundamental vocabulary, basic sentence structures and social conventions necessary for simple interpersonal communication in Japanese. The emphasis is on the using the Japanese language in everyday situations.
JPN-102	Modern Japanese II	This course increases students' vocabulary, grammar, and cultural knowledge necessary to become proficient in Japanese. This course gives students the opportunity to reflect on their own linguistic system and cultural milieu and acquaints them with a different approach to communication and with a different view of the world. The knowledge gained in this course establishes the foundation for further inquiry into the Japanese language, which can happen both in and out of the classroom.
LGL-104	Introduction to Civil Trial Procedures	This course includes study of composition, location and jurisdiction of all courts, examination of all aspects of trial preparation and process, and some legal drafting and writing.
LGL-106	Computers and the Law	This course will help the Paralegal become familiar with the possible applications of the computers in law offices of different sizes and provide a general introduction to the varieties of hardware and software available and the creation of appropriate systems for a law office.
LGL-107	Alternative Dispute Resolution	Alternative dispute resolution is a method for using out-of-court alternative forums to resolve disputes. This course will examine the historical, statutory, and economic basis of ADR. Topics to be covered in both business and dissolution of marriage are  mediation, arbitration, mini trials, and summary jury trials.
LGL-108	Introduction to Law for the Paralegal	This course includes a general discourse on the training and purpose of Paralegals, examines the role of the law in modern society, the ethical and professional practice standards applicable to lawyers and paralegals, surveys the various fields of law and examines legal resource materials and the processes of legal research.
LGL-202	Wills, Trusts and Probate Administration	Study of the more common forms of wills and trusts and a survey of the fundamental principles of law applicable to each; a study of the organization and jurisdiction of a Missouri Probate Court; a detailed analysis of the administration of estates in Missouri Probate; a review of estate and inheritance taxes applicable to such estates.
LGL-205	Law of Real Property and Real Estate Transactions	A study of the law of real property and in-depth survey of the more common types of real estate transaction and conveyances, such as deeds, contracts, leases, deeds of trust; drafting problems involving various of these instruments; and special research projects related to the subject matter; study of the system of recording and search of public documents.
LGL-206	Business Organization and Government Regulation	A study of the formation and operation of corporations, partnerships, business trusts and other business vehicles, including a survey of the fundamental principles of law applicable to each; special research projects related to the subject matter; a study of the impact and regulation of taxation and other forms of government regulation of business.
LGL-211	Torts	A study of the fundamental principles of the law of torts including special research assignments related to the subject matter, consideration of the techniques of investigation involved in the lawyer's handling of tort claims; a study of the various forms of pleadings involved in commencing such claims in court actions.
LGL-216	Advanced Civil Trial Procedures	This course is designed as an advanced course for those students who have completed Introduction to Civil Trial Procedures. The focus will be a detailed examination of court rules pertaining to discovery, intervention, interpleading in trial procedures and appellate procedures.
LGL-217	Legal Research	This course is designed as an introduction to the process of legal research, and an introduction to the connection between research and legal writing. The course involves several research projects to be completed both in the lab (Internet, CD-ROM and CALR) and in a law library. A moderate amount of legal writing will be integrated into the course assignments. This course is a
LGL-218	Legal Writing	This course is designed as a continuation of LGL 217, Legal Research, and is intended to expand on all principles involved in legal reasoning as it relates to legal analysis and the preparation of legal memoranda. Students will be responsible for completing several writing projects which involve a legal research component. This course requires students to travel off campus to a local law library.
LGL-219	Workplace Learning: Paralegal	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will observe and participate in the functions of the business to enhance their preparation for entering the field. Minimum 150 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
LGL-220	Criminal Law and Procedure for the Paralegal	This course will cover the substantive elements of major crimes, the requisite intent and defenses. The criminal procedures will be discussed and the role of the paralegal in the criminal process analyzed.
LGL-222	Legal Research on the Internet	This course will demonstrate the use of the Internet as a legal research tool. Using various browsers and search engines, students will learn basic Internet maneuvers. Students will learn the process of searching and retrieving information to build a file of relevant legal sites. Current legal issues on Internet use will be examined. Considerable time will be required on-line to meet the requirements of this class.
LGL-223	Evidence	This course is the study of the gathering and admissibility of various types of evidence. The theories of relevance, materiality, hearsay, and competency that apply to all evidence will be explored in detail.
LGL-224	Environmental Law	This course will explore the issues of business and consumer generated pollution, hazardous, and toxic waste. The student will learn how the federal and state governments are trying to contain levels of pollution and to clean up hazardous waste sites and examine the major environmental protection laws applicable to businesses and individuals.
LGL-225	Administrative Law	An examination of the nature and scope of Administrative Law. The authority of administrative agencies, Administrative Procedures Act, rules and rule making, administrative hearings, and the role of the paralegal will be examined in this course.
LGL-226	Law Office Administration	A study of the function, management, and administration of the law office or legal department. It includes office environment, structures, personnel supervision, financial management, records management, and management theories.
LGL-228	Family Law	The student will become familiar with stature and case law regarding the dissolution of marriage action, termination of parental rights, adoption law, court appointment of guardians and guardian ad litem. The student will develop skills in client interviewing and counseling; lean in detail the preparation of necessary forms and documentation to be filed in court; and learn the discovery devices such as interrogatories and deposition and emphasize their utilization in family law matters.
LGL-230	Employment Law	The study of the employer and employee relationship and the laws governing the employment agreement. This course will examine the specific areas of employment discrimination, Worker's Compensation, and regulation of union activity.
LGL-232	Contracts	A study of the types and kinds of contracts and an in-depth analysis of the basic elements of contract law. The proper form and manner of entering into a lawful contract will be analyzed.
LGL-233	Bankruptcy 	A study of the law of bankruptcy and the filing procedures. The elements of bankruptcy and completion of the debtor forms will be emphasis points.
LIB-101	Introduction to Library and Online Research	This course offers students instruction in using library resources, including the Internet, online databases, and the library catalog. Through a combination of hands-on practice and lectures, students will learn to locate, evaluate, and manage information efficiently and effectively.
MCM-101	Introduction to Mass Communications	This course examines the nature and influence of mass media in our society. Students will analyze the impact media has throughout the world. Topics include mass media foundations, media's role in culture, ethics, influence on society, media methods, controls, gatekeeping, and world impact.
MCM-102	Media Literacy	This course focuses on approaches through which students can develop a sensitivity to media messages, as well as enhance their appreciation of media programming. This course devotes attention to the process and impact of media on the individual and society. The class analyzes  applied media formats, including journalism, advertising, and political communication.
MCM-110	Journalism I: Writing and Reporting	Contemporary newspaper writing and reporting techniques will be covered in this introductory course through discussions, readings, and practical exercises. The concepts of news coverage in the American press will be emphasized. Students are required to write news stories on a regular basis and apply skills in multimedia concepts.
MCM-112	Feature Writing	Students will be exposed to the professional and marketing possibilities of feature writing. They will learn the theories and techniques of writing features for contemporary print and digital publications. Students are required to write and edit on a regular basis.
MCM-113	Applied Journalism	Students are given the opportunity to gain practical experience in journalistic concepts and techniques through work on available campus media outlets. Students are required to complete hands-on projects.
MCM-115	Acting for the Camera	This course includes the following  (1) exploration of the aesthetics and principles of acting for the camera; (2) analysis of diverse acting styles and outstanding performances in film and television; and (3) acting exercises for the camera. Some acting exercises will be videotaped and edited for analysis. (Same course as THT 115).
MCM-120	Introduction to Broadcasting	This course examines the background and operation of the broadcasting industry, including history, regulations, social and economic settings and the organization of radio and television stations. Newer technologies will also be a focus of this course. Some hands-on experience might be included.
MCM-121	Television Production	The course instructs the student in the effective and creative use of television equipment also providing students with practical experience in technical areas including lighting, graphics, and field production. Students will cooperate in producing projects such as a newscast, advertisement, interview, or investigative feature.
MCM-122	Applied Broadcasting	This is a skills-content course in which students will develop skills in broadcasting principles and practice. It may include the campus radio and/or television facilities.
MCM-123	Broadcast Journalism	Students in this course study the principles and skills of radio and television journalism, including work in the news operations of the campus radio or television facilities.
MCM-124	Radio Production	The primary objectives of this course are to introduce students to basic professional concepts of radio broadcast theory and techniques and to provide students with hands-on experience. Some additional time in the lab or studio may be required.
MCM-125	Scriptwriting for Television and Film	This course is designed to provide practical instruction in writing short scripts for TV and film for the beginning student and the student interested in the creative aspects of scriptwriting. Basic terminology and script formats will be presented as well as analysis of a variety of scripts.
MCM-126	Video Production - Field	Students will learn video skills in pre-production (concept development), production (camera shooting) and post-production (editing). On-location, single camera shooting will be emphasized. Class includes lectures, discussions, practical applications and evaluations.
MCM-130	Film Appreciation	Film Appreciation offers a serious, comprehensive introduction to the art, industry, culture and experience of movies. Students study a variety of films  contemporary and classic, narrative and nonnarrative, animated and live action, American and international.
MCM-131	History of Film	Students study world film history from the magic lantern to contemporary films by examining technical, artistic, sociological, and economic factors in fiction and nonfiction, feature-length, and short works. Topics include various styles and movements as well as issues such as violence and politics.
MCM-132	Major Themes in Film	Each semester this course focuses on one film theme or type. Examples include Academy Award winning films, animation, comedy, musicals, westerns, and women in film. Classes include discussion, written analysis, and/or oral presentations, and in-class screenings or online viewings of films illustrating the semesters' topic. This course may be retaken for credit with different topics.
MCM-134	Filmmaking	Students learn the fundamentals of short filmmaking and editing. Topics include basic camera operation, lighting and exposure control, sound recording and creative sound use, digital postproduction, and how technique relates to aesthetic quality and the communication of ideas and emotion. Access to equipment is provided. Lectures, discussions, screenings, and hands-on, project based experience. Additional time in the editing lab is required.
MCM-140	Introduction to Advertising	Students learn about advertising theories and techniques by studying history, functions, the importance of marketing, behavioral science, and aesthetics. Topics include ad agency organization, campaign planning, and media placement and production (radio, television, print, point of purchase). This will be accomplished through lectures, discussions, and campaign analysis.
MCM-141	Public Relations	This introductory course focuses on the work of the public relations practitioner as communications specialist. Topics include the techniques of effective public relations and the demands of the field. Students will explore the ways segments of the public form opinions and the ways public relations should influence that attitude building. Students also write press releases and examine field/case studies.
MCM-142	Applied Advertising	This course will further the student's knowledge of advertising practices, campaigns, strategies, and production. Along with lectures, discussions, and other activities, this course includes scripting, storyboarding and executing radio, television and/or print ads. Class involves lectures, discussions, and video production activities.
MCM-143	Convergence Media Production	Students will study composition and delivery of commercial, educational and public new-media messages by surveying current outlets and producing messages for those outlets. Utilizing current authoring software, students will combine text, graphics, photos, video and audio to deliver messages for the web as well as other relevant outlets.
MCM-201	Workplace Learning I: Media	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will gain practical experience through selected media outlets. Minimum 150 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
MCM-202	Workplace Learning II: Media	This experiential course provides the student the opportunity to apply theory and skills learned in the classroom, learn new skills, and explore career possibilities while supervised by a professional in the field and a faculty member. Students will gain continued practical experience through selected media outlets. Minimum 150 hours in the workplace throughout the term.
MCM-209	Black Cinema	This course examines the historical and social evolution of African-Americans in the film industry. It traces the impact of African-Americans as actors, technicians, directors, producers, and audience of short and feature-length films. (Students who want Mass Communications credit should enroll in MCM 209).
MCM-211	Applied Public Relations	Applied Public Relations provides for the integration and application of public relations theories and practices studied in the prerequisite public relations course. Through further study and practical application the student will develop a greater understanding of the purpose, function and importance of effective public relations activity in today's increasingly complex society.
MCM-215	Major Film Directors	Students study a major director's landmark films. Topics include consideration of the selected director's style, themes, cinematography, stars, and social as well as other artistic factors that have made this an influential director. Class includes lectures, discussion, written analysis, and in-class screenings of films.
MCM-217	Publications Writing	This course focuses on the specialized and distinctive writing skills employed in technical and corporate publications. Students will master the basic skills needed to write simple reports, product descriptions and price lists.  In the corporate area, students will research and write news and feature stories for newsletters, as well as press release and brochure copy. All writing requires basic word processing skills.
MCM-218	Advanced Filmmaking	Students enhance their short filmmaking skills and learn advanced techniques. Topics include advanced camera operation, lighting and exposure control, sync sound and creative sound use, scriptwriting, working with actors, enhanced digital editing, and how technique relates to aesthetic quality and the communication of ideas and emotion. Access to equipment is provided. Lectures, discussions, screenings, and hands-on, project based experience. Additional time in the editing lab is required.
MCM-219	Multimedia Applications	1-3	This course covers selected topics in multimedia production.  Students use state-of-the-art equipment to produce beginning, intermediate or advanced projects in the area emphasized.  Topics may include, but are not limited to, nonlinear video editing, video animation, digital audio production, etc.  Course may be retaken for credit with different topics.
MCM-220	Advanced Audio Production	Students will develop their skills in Audio Production through usage of computer based digital audio editing systems. This course will include concept development and scripting, recording techniques, and advanced editing techniques. Class includes lectures, discussion, and audio production activities.
MCM-221	Media Portfolio Review	Preparing effective presentations of creative work within current digital formats is the focus of this course. Students will learn to edit, record and prepare material toward the development of an effective portfolio, aiding the completion of their studies in the Mass Communications program.
ME-100	Measurement, Materials and Safety	This course prepares students for the National Institute of Metalworking Skills (NIMS) Measurement, Materials and Safety credentialing examination. Students will learn foundational skills for the metalworking industry including the basics of metal cutting, measurement, safety and shop math. Additional hours required.
ME-101	Welding Technology	The major objective of this course is to provide a comprehensive coverage of current welding practices. A variety of welding processes will be covered including shielded metal-arc, gas shielded-arc, resistance and other special techniques intended specifically for welding sophisticated metals. Additional lab hours required.
ME-108	Principles of Plumbing/Pipefitting	The principles of water supplies and sewage systems are presented. The course covers alteration, repair, and maintenance methods of commercial and domestic plumbing systems. Nomenclature of the various connecting devices for metal and plastic pipe and proper assembly such as soldering, threading, and gluing are included. Laboratory exercises and assembly projects provide the practice and methodology required to successfully repair and maintain fixtures and systems. Additional lab hours required.
ME-110	HVAC Operator I	A practical course dealing with the basic operation, maintenance and troubleshooting of heating, ventilating and air conditioning equipment including air, closed water stream and control systems. The dynamic equipment components of various systems will be studied with special emphasis upon preventive maintenance.
ME-111	Job Planning, Benchwork & Layout	This course prepares students for the National Institute of Metalworking Skills (NIMS) Job Planning, Benchwork & Layout credentialing examination. Students will build upon skills learned in the Measurement, Materials & Safety class. They will learn additional foundational skills for the metalworking industry including the basics of benchwork, layout, hole making operations, grinding, shop trigonometry and inductory geometric dimensioning and tolerancing. Additional hours required.
ME-120	Manual Machining I	This course prepares students for the National Institute for Metalworking Skills (NIMS) level 1 milling, grinding and drill press skills examinations. Students will build upon skills learned in the Measurement, Materials & Safety class and the Job Planning, Benchwork & Layout course. They will learn additional skills for the metalworking industry including the safe set up and operation of milling machines, drill presses and grinders. Some of the projects required for NIMS credentialing will be incorporated as lab projects. Additional hours required.
ME-121	Computer Integrated Manufacturing	This course applies principles of robotics and automation. Students will use CNC equipment to produce actual models of their three-dimensional designs. Fundamental concepts of robotics used in automated manufacturing and design analysis are included.
ME-133	Production Control	Students will gain an understanding of the tools, techniques and processes used to plan, schedule and track materials through the complete value chain in a manufacturing environment. Topics will include both manual and computer assisted methods including Materials Requirements Planning, Shop Floor control, Lean Manufacturing and "Just in Time" techniques.
ME-135	Mechanics - Statics	This is a study of forces and their effects on motionless objects. Applications to trusses, beams, frames, and other topics are presented. Basic theory for structural design in mechanical and civil programs is studied.
ME-138	Mechanical Measurement	This course is designed to provide the fundamentals of dimensional measurement for the technician. Measurement terms, equipment and tools will be explained and laboratory activities will provide the student an opportunity to master the basic skills of measuring devices. Scaled, vernier, micrometer instruments and dial indicators with gage blocks will be used. Measurement standards will be reviewed.
ME-140	Introduction to Robotics	This course is a historical overview of the use and development of robotics. Topics to be studied include specific types and application of industrial robots, the effects of industrial robots and technology on employers and employees, and the programming and functioning of robotic simulators. Additional lab hours required.
ME-151	Manufacturing Processes I	Teaching theory and manipulative skills in the basic processes of manufacturing  lathes, milling machines, shapers, drill presses, welding, foundry, sheet metal, precision instrument reading, and hand tools. Additional lab hours required.
ME-152	Manufacturing Processes II	This course is a continuation of Manufacturing Processes I with emphasis in Flexible Manufacturing Systems (FMS). Instruction includes Computer Numerical Control (CNC) programming, Robotics applications of Programmable Logic Controls (PLC), and Computer Integrated Manufacturing (CIM). Students will develop a CIM cell project. Additional lab hours required.
ME-153	Lathe and Mill Operations and Safety	This course is designed to teach fundamental machining operations on a Lathe and Mill. The course will emphasize general shop safety practices and machine operating procedures that is safe for the operators and other workers.
ME-154	Mechanical Blueprint Reading	This course covers drawing understandings, sheet sizes, information in title blocks, revision blocks, and tolerance blocks. Students will learn how to use measuring instruments as they pertain to blueprints. Additional hours required.
ME-200	Manual Machining II	This course prepares student for the National Institute for Metal Working Skills (NIMS) level I Turning Between Centers and Chucking credentialing assessment. Students will build upon skills learned in the Measurement, Materials & Safety and the Job Planning, Benchwork & Layout corses. They will learn additional skills for the metalworking industry including fundamental operations performed on a lathe. Some of the projects required for NIMS credentialing will be incorporated as lab projects. Additional hours required.
ME-210	Robotics Subsystems and Components	A continuation of Introduction to Robotics (ME  140) covering more advanced programming on ROBOT simulators (i.e., application of motion, voice, light, and sound sensors). Typical robot subsystems and components such as electronic (feedback devices, controls, microprocessor interfacing), hydraulic, pneumatic and mechanical drive mechanisms are covered with regard to their functions and operational principles.  Additional lab hours required.
ME-211	Programmable Logic Controllers	This course presents the fundamentals of ladder logic (or relay logic) used on modern industrial controllers. Basic elements such as timers, counters, and sequences are studied, as well as traditional methods of applying them to machine control. Students will program and perform laboratory experiments with programmable logic controllers, such as the Allen Bradley SLC-100 controllers and interface them to various input and output devices. An industrial robot also is available in class for lab experiments. Use of IBM/Allen Bradley personal computer interface software will be covered as well. Additional lab hours required.
ME-212	Introduction to Computer Numerical Control (CNC) Machining	This course prepares students for the National Institute for Metalworking Skills (NIMS) level 1 Computer Numeric Control (CNC) Milling examinations. Students will build upon skills learned in the Measurement, Materials & Safety class and the Job Planning, Benchwork & Layout course. They will learn additional skills for the metalworking industry including the safe set up, operation and basic programming of Computer Numeric Controlled milling machines. They will work on the project required for NIMS credentialing. Additional hours required.
ME-223	Basic Hydraulics I	This course is arranged to give the student a general knowledge of the basic components of hydraulic systems, as well as a general understanding of the basic laws and formulas used in simple hydraulic calculations. It includes such topics as pumps, control valves, control assemblies, actuators, the use of standard hydraulic symbols, and maintenance procedures.
ME-226	Air Conditioning and Heating	This course covers the operation of air conditioning and heating equipment and the calculation of cooling/heating loads for residential and commercial buildings. Laboratory experiments will supplement classroom work. Additional lab hours required.
ME-230	Introduction to 3-D Solid Modeling for Design	This course is designed to teach the use of 3D solid modeling CAD packages. Instruction includes how to use a 3D CAD package to develop solid models in order to generate assemblies and 2D drawings. CAD package used in a particular semester or a section of this course may depend on the industry or student's demand. Some of the commonly used 3D solid modeling packages in the industry are  SDRC'S I-Deas Master, SolidWorks, Pro-E, and Solid Edge. It is suggested that prior to registering for this course, students would inquire with the department as to which CAD will be emphasized in a given semester or a section of the course. Additional lab hours required.
ME-232	Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing	Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing will provide an introduction to consistent and clear application of dimensions and tolerances as outlined in the ASME Y14.5-2009 standard. Complete documentation of product requirements will consist of symbols, feature control frames, geometric tolerances, datums, and material condition modifiers. The course will also include methods of tolerance verification and basic design considerations.
ME-237	Programmable Logic Controllers II	This course is a continuation of the study of Programmable Logic Controllers. Students will cover topics including comparators, variables, subroutines, and human machine interfaces. Additional lab hours required.
ME-241	Numerical Control Programming	This course will include a brief summary of machine types and their application with movies and local field trips; also, basic CNC programming language and preparation of part programs. Students will program and operate three axis vertical mills with sequential and word address controls.
ME-242	Mechanics-Dynamics	Dynamics extends the study of mechanics from forces and their effects on motionless objects to motion and the forces required to produce motion. Energy, impulse and momentum are included.
ME-243	Strength of Materials	This course consists of the study of the reaction of materials to tension, compression torsion and flexure. Applications to the design of beams, columns, shafts and fasteners are presented. The students perform various materials tests in a fully-equipped laboratory. Additional lab hours required.
ME-244	Mechanical Design I	This course applies the principles of engineering graphics to problems dealing with the drawing and design of machines and parts. The emphasis is to produce accurate and complete detail and assembly drawings utilizing the latest industrial drafting procedures and practices which include GD&T methods. Additional lab hours required.
ME-249	Materials and Metallurgy	This course is a survey of the sources, preparation, properties and uses of engineering materials. Topics include the following  the iron-carbon system, ferrous metallurgy, nonferrous metallurgy, ceramics, plastics, elastomers, composites, and finishes. Practical laboratory activities are performed to clarify and enhance text material. Additional lab hours required.
ME-254	Electricity and Controls	A basic course in AC-DC electricity and controls for non-electrical students. Study of DC, AC and magnetic circuits used for electric motor drives and transformers introduction to solid state and electromagnetic controls. Laboratory experiments parallel classroom material covered. Additional lab hours required.
ME-255	Fluid Power	This course is that portion of fluid mechanics which deals with its application and has been termed "Fluid Power." It emphasizes the study of components of hydraulics and pneumatics systems as used for industrial power transmission and control purposes. Additional lab hours required.
ME-262	Energy Impact of Mechanical Products	This course will focus on the identification and energy impact of mechanical products utilized in residential and commercial building. Because energy-related equipment in buildings can vary in age and efficiency, this course will include reviewing a variety of products and their features as they relate to overall performance. Additional hours required.
ME-263	Energy Control Systems	This course provides an overview of basic electrical systems and examines overall building control systems and automation. Students will explore how control systems can effectively monitor and manipulate building systems to achieve maximum efficiency. Additional hours required.
ME-264	Energy Conservation Measurement and Auditing	This course is the culminating experience of the Sustainable Energy Technology Certificate Program integrating material learned in previous classes. A hands on approach will be taken, including Building Energy Auditing, and Testing and Balancing. Additional hours required.
MGT-101	Introduction to Supervision	This course is designed to provide the student with the latest leadership skills to function as a supervisor in today's modern organizations. Special emphasis is placed on coaching, motivation, positive reinforcement, achieving high productivity and the latest court decisions and laws that affect management decisions. This course will give the student confidence and skills needed to succeed in today's workplace.
MGT-106	Human Resources Management	The emphasis is on the development of knowledge, skills, attitudes of managers, supervisors and employees in resolving human problems and in developing effective employee motivation and productivity in both union and nonunion settings. Topics include  sexual harassment, EEO, ethics, cultural diversity, grievance and conflict resolution, legal issues, compensation and benefits, turnover, employment and team building.
MGT-120	Managerial Leadership	This course introduces a balanced approach to leadership  theory, critical thinking and development of skills.  The student will apply leadership theories and concepts to develop critical thinking skills, differentiate between learning about leadership and learning to be a leader in the acquisition of skill.
MGT-201	Case Studies in Supervision	This course is comprised of actual cases in supervisory management and allows the student to conceptualize alternatives and possible solutions to real cases on topics like  problem employees, training, compensation and benefits, absenteeism, sexual harassment, employee rights and responsibilities, safety, EEO, and conflict resolution.
MGT-204	Business Organization and Management	A study of basic concepts, functions, and the management process of planning, organization, staffing, directions, and control as they relate to modern business operations and problems.
MKT-104	Principles of Selling	A course in creative, strategic, consultative and adaptive selling techniques applied to various kinds of products and services sold into and through industrial, trade, and retail markets. Emphasis on clear and adequate effectiveness of selling, utilizing presentation skills and a high degree of business ethics.
MKT-203	Principles of Marketing	This course introduces and examines the essential functions of the strategic marketing process, including the marketing analysis of business opportunities and subsequent development of marketing strategies.
MTH-004	Hands-On Arithmetic Workshop	Hands-On Arithmetic Workshop is designed to help students experiencing difficulty with mathematics in general and arithmetic in particular. Students progress at their own pace using manipulatives in a guided discovery mode to gain an understanding of numbers, arithmetic operations (on whole numbers, integers, fractions, decimals, and involving percents) and metric measurement. Additional lab hours required.
MTH-020	Pre Algebra	This course is for students who need to review the basic fundamentals of mathematics. Topics include operations on whole numbers, fractions, decimals, percents, signed numbers, word problem applications and an introduction to algebra.	
MTH-025	Hands-On Algebra Workshop	The purpose of Hands-On Algebra Workshop is to help students who have experienced great difficulty with mathematics in general and algebra in particular. Working individually and in small groups, students use various mathematics manipulatives in a guided discovery mode to explore algebraic concepts in order to gain an understanding of integers, linear equations, polynomials, graphing, and functions. In this hands-on lab course, students proceed at their own pace. This course does not replace Elementary Algebra.
MTH-030	Elementary Algebra	This course covers basic algebra. Topics include operations on polynomials, factoring polynomials, linear equations and their applications, graphing lines and solving equations.
MTH-040	Elementary Algebra and Basic Math	This course covers the basics of fundamental mathematics and algebra. Topics include operations on whole numbers, fractions, decimals, percents, signed numbers, word problem applications, operations on polynomials, factoring polynomials, linear equations and their applications, graphing lines and solving equations.
MTH-108	Elementary Applied Mathematics	This course will include a review of fractions, decimals and percents. Topics may include ratios, proportions, measurements, metrics, powers, roots, simple equations, estimation, graphs, and applications relevant to many Associate in Applied Science programs.
MTH-123	Introduction to the Texas Instruments Graphing Calculator	This course is designed for students who will be using a graphing calculator in their math and science course work. Students will be introduced to the use of the TI-83 plus graphing calculator. Students will learn to perform basic computations, graph functions, create tables and use stat plots to graph data.
MTH-124	Technical Mathematics I	This course includes operations on algebraic expressions, solving linear equations, the Cartesian coordinate system in two dimensions, slope of a line, and graphing techniques.
MTH-137	Bridges to Intermediate Algebra	This course is designed for students who qualify for Intermediate Algebra. Completion of this course will greatly enhance a student's chance for success in Intermediate Algebra. This course offers a brief review of linear equations and inequalities. Also included is an intense review of exponential properties, polynomials, factoring, rational expressions, the rectangular coordinate system and basic linear graphs.
MTH-140	Intermediate Algebra	This course will provide the transition from elementary algebra into college-level math courses.  Operations on rational expressions, operations on radicals, solving quadratic equations, and the rectangular coordinate system are among the topics covered.
MTH-144	Technical Algebra and Trigonometry	This course includes basic algebraic skills, complex numbers, quadratic equations, linear systems, and a study of the trigonometric functions. Applications for engineering technology students are included in the course content.
MTH-160	College Algebra	This college algebra course includes the following topics  theory of equations; systems of equations; functions and graphs including polynomial, rational, exponential, and logarithmic; matrices; sequences and series; and the binomial theorem. Applications will be primarily from science and business. Credit will be granted for only one of the following  MTH 160, MTH 160A, MTH 160B, MTH 160C or MTH 185.
MTH-161	Applications of College Mathematics	This college-level mathematics course is offered for students pursuing non-STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) degrees and career paths. The course focuses on mathematical reasoning and the solving of real-life problems. The following six topics will be covered  sets, logic, consumer mathematics, probability, statistics, and modeling with global data. This course is designed to fulfill general education requirements.
MTH-165	Structures of Mathematical Systems I	Introduction to problem solving and logic. A study of the development and construction of mathematical systems, including whole numbers, integers, and rational numbers. Suggested for students planning to transfer into early childhood  education, elementary education, or special education programs. 
MTH-166	Structures of Mathematical Systems II	Continuation of MTH 165. Includes an intuitive study of elementary geometry, the deductive theory of geometry, graphing, probability and statistics, with applications in the area of elementary education.  Suggested for students planning to transfer into early childhood, elementary education, or special education programs.
MTH-170	Trigonometry	This course uses an analytic approach to the definitions and graphs of the functions of an angle. It includes formulas and identities, trigonometric functions, inverse functions, and radian measure. Note  Credit will not be granted for both MTH 170 and MTH 185.
MTH-177	Finite Mathematics	This course includes a study of matrices, linear programming, and probability, along with several types of applications.
MTH-180	Introductory Statistics	This course introduces the student to the elementary mathematics of descriptive statistics, probability, and statistical inference. Topics include methods of data collection, organization, and representation, measures of center and variation, elementary probability theory, probability distributions, the central limit theorem, confidence intervals, hypothesis testing, ANOVA, correlation, and regression analysis.
MTH-185	Precalculus	Precalculus is a unified study of college algebra and trigonometry. Emphasis is placed on the development of algebraic and trigonometric concepts. The topics include  Algebraic, exponential, logarithmic and trigonometric functions and graphs; the solving of equations; systems of equations; trigonometric identities; sequences and series; and the binomial theorem. Note  Students will be granted credit for either MTH 185, or MTH 160 and MTH 170.
MTH-186	Survey of Calculus	Topics included are limits and continuity of functions of a single variable; derivatives and antiderivatives of algebraic, exponential, and logarithmic functions; and business oriented applications.
MTH-210	Analytic Geometry and Calculus I	This course is the first part of a three semester sequence of Calculus. Topics included are limits and continuity of functions of a single variable, derivatives and antiderivatives of algebraic functions and trigonometric functions, and applications.
MTH-212	Discrete Mathematics	Students will learn topics in discrete mathematics that are particularly relevant to computer science. Topics include logic, elementary number theory, modular arithmetic, methods of proof, sets, probability and combinatorics, recurrence relations, algorithmic efficiency, elementary graph theory, and trees.
MTH-215	Linear Algebra	This course covers systems of linear equations, properties of matrices and determinants, vector spaces, linear transformations, inner products, and eigenvalues, as well as selected applications. 
MTH-220	Analytic Geometry and Calculus II	This course is the second part of a three sequence of Calculus. Differentiation and integration of transcendental functions, techniques of integration, improper integrals, parametric equations, polar coordinates, and infinite and power series are among the topics covered.
MTH-230	Analytic Geometry and Calculus III	This course is the third part of a three semester sequence of Calculus. Topics covered include solid analytic geometry, vectors in two and three dimensions, differential calculus of multivariate functions, partial derivatives, directional derivatives, gradients, multiple integration, and an introduction to the calculus of vector fields.
MTH-240	Differential Equations	This course introduces methods of solving ordinary differential equations. Topics included are first order differential equations, higher order differential equations, LaPlace transform methods, systems of differential equations, and applications.
MUS-101	Music Theory I	An integrated course in musicianship. Diatonic harmony with reference to 18th-century style. Combines written and keyboard harmonization. Develops rhythm, pitch and harmony through sight-singing and dictation. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-102	Music Theory II	Continuation of MUS 101. Enlargement of vocabulary to comprise inversion of triads, non-harmonic tones, chord extensions, harmonic analysis and modulation. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-103	Basic Music	A course in the fundamentals of music including note reading, scales, keys, intervals, rhythmic activities and simple keyboard study.	
MUS-113	History of Jazz	This class is a review of artists, composers, and other influences associated with the art of Jazz. It will examine the relationship of Jazz on culture in the United States and the world. 
MUS-114	Music Appreciation	This class is a survey of various aspects of music including the philosophy, science, theory, anthropology, sociology, history, and physical act of producing music. A wide variety of musical styles and associative composers will be used to explore these aspects of music.
MUS-115	Voice I	Introduction to the fundamentals of singing. Attention directed to tone production, breath control, diction, phrasing, rhythmic and melodic precision stage deportment.
MUS-116	Voice II	A continuation of Voice I. Efficient breath control, improvement of tone quality, and song interpretation are stressed. Songs in English and Italian will be studied.
MUS-121	Class Piano I	A course designed to develop basic skills and techniques in piano playing applicable to various types of music. For the student with no previous keyboard experience.	
MUS-122	Class Piano II	Continuation of MUS 121.
MUS-128	History of Rock and Roll	This class is a review of the music, artists, composers, and other people associated with Rock and Roll and its impact on culture.
MUS-130	Beginning Guitar	Course objective is to acquire a classical playing technique. Emphasis on correct seating and hand positions, note reading, chording and basic music theory. Students must supply their own guitar (nylon string recommended).
MUS-131	Chorus	Study and performance of representative choral literature. Emphasis on vocal technique and development. Additional studio hours required.	
MUS-132	Orchestra	Study and performance of representative chamber and symphonic literature.  Additional studio hours required.
MUS-134	Symphonic Band	Study and performance of representative symphonic band literature. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-135	Choir	A study of advanced choral literature. Emphasis on vocal technique and development. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-138	Jazz Improvisation I	The study and application of beginning jazz theory and improvisation to the performance of jazz music in a combo setting with little emphasis on concert performance. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-139	Jazz Improvisation II	The study and application of intermediate jazz theory and improvisation to the performance of jazz music in a combo setting with greater emphasis on concert performance. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-141	Applied Music I	Individualized study of instrument or voice.
MUS-142	Applied Music II	Continuation of MUS 141.
MUS-144	African Drum Ensemble	Students will learn and perform the dance music of West African countries. Special emphasis will be placed on the hand techniques of the djembe. Students will, however, perform on many other instruments as well, including  bells, dununs, and shekeres. Additional hours required.
MUS-150	Fundamentals of Music Technology	This course teaches the fundamentals of computer-based music and sound production. Topics covered include the computer operating system, file manipulation, basic MIDI sequencing, basic audio recording, data archiving and CD creation.
MUS-152	Audio Engineering	Students will learn how to run a recording session from set-up, to tracking, to tear-down. They will learn the theory of compressors, EQ, delays, reverbs, chorus, and other effects. Microphone design, selection, and placement are emphasized. This course combines theory with practical experience in digital audio.
MUS-153	Drum Machine Programming	Students will learn to create drum patterns, beats, and loops using a variety of music software and hardware. Traditional drum instrumentation, experimental techniques, groove settings, and editing in a variety of styles will be explored.
MUS-154	Music Recording with Pro Tools I	In this course students will learn how to use the Pro Tools digital audio workstation to record music. They will learn to use plugin effects, mix automation, and studio hardware. The Audio Engineering class is helpful, but not required.
MUS-201	Music Theory III	Continuation of MUS 102. Review of diatonic harmony, Chromatic harmony, 18th and 19th century practices. Analysis of written and keyboard harmonization. Development of rhythm, pitch and harmony through sight-singing and dictation. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-202	Music Theory IV	Continuation of MUS 201. Advanced chromatic harmony, 19th and 20th century practices. Analysis of written and keyboard harmonization. Development of rhythm, pitch and harmony through sight-singing and dictation. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-211	Music History I	The history of music in Western civilization from its origins to the Baroque era. Emphasis on listening to and analyzing the music with score.
MUS-212	Music History II	The history of music in Western civilization from the Baroque era to the present. Emphasis on listening to and analyzing the music with score.
MUS-216	Jazz Improvisation III	The study and application of advanced techniques in jazz improvisation in a combo setting with emphasis on concert performance. This course may be reelected for additional credit. Additional studio hours required.
MUS-221	Class Piano III	Continuation of MUS 122.
MUS-222	Class Piano IV	Continuation of MUS 221.
MUS-241	Applied Music III	Continuation of MUS 142.
MUS-242	Applied Music IV	Continuation of MUS 241.
MUS-254	Music Recording with Pro Tools II	Learn to use the Pro Tools digital audio workstation to record music. The second semester emphasizes an in-depth study of advanced mixing and mastering techniques used to complete digitally recorded projects. The Audio Engineering class is helpful, but not required.
NUR-151	Fundamentals of Nursing	This course is an introduction to the role of the nurse in meeting needs common to all patients through knowledge, skill, and attitudes essential for the practice of nursing, based on principles of physical, biological, behavioral sciences, and nursing theory. Additional hours required.
NUR-152	Nursing Laboratory Practicum I	This course is designed to provide the student with the practice of nursing skills in the College Nursing Laboratory and to reinforce principles introduced in Fundamentals of Nursing. Additional lab hours required.
NUR-153	Nursing Adults and Children I	This course is designed to assist the student to acquire knowledge and skills in meeting the needs of adults and children with an emphasis on adaptation to illness and hospitalization in medical-surgical nursing, and mothers and newborns during the maternity cycle. Additional hours required.
NUR-154	Nursing Laboratory Practicum II	This course is designed to provide the student with the practice of nursing skills in the College Nursing Laboratory and to reinforce nursing principles introduced in NUR 153. Additional hours required.
NUR-160	LPN to RN Bridge Course	This course is required to prepare the licensed practical nurse to enter the associate degree in nursing program. Emphasis is on assessing, reinforcing, and expanding competencies. Classroom content focuses on role change, communication, critical thinking, the nursing process, pharmacology, and nutrition. Includes a college laboratory and clinical component. Additional hours required.
NUR-161	LPN Experiential Credit I	11	This course is designed to transcript LPN experiential credit for first semester nursing. LPN's must have successfully completed NUR 160.
NUR-251	Nursing of Adults and Children II	10	This course is designed to assist the student to further develop knowledge and skills necessary to meet the needs of adults and children with selected medical-surgical problems and behavioral health problems. Additional hours required.
NUR-252	Nursing of Adults and Children III	This course is designed to assist the student to further develop knowledge and skills necessary to meet the needs of adults and children with selected medical-surgical problems. Additional hours required.
NUR-253	Management Skills in Nursing	This course includes theory and practicum in principles of managing the care of a group of patients. The student will participate actively in the roll of a beginning staff nurse under the guidance of agency staff and instructor. Additional hours required.
OTA-101	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy Assistant I	This course is an introduction to occupational therapy, its philosophy, goals and focus in relation to basic treatment in geriatrics, psychosocial dysfunction, physical disabilities and developmental pediatrics. Beginning skills in practice of occupational therapy are learned. (21 clock hours of clinical assignments to be arranged)
OTA-102	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy Assistant II	This course provides students with beginning skills in occupational therapy treatment related to psycho-social dysfunction across the lifespan. Students learn basic psychiatric terms, diagnoses and behaviors as well as how occupational performance is affected. Practice with selecting and implementing group intervention, assessing areas of occupation and analyzing occupational performance as well as clinical experiences in a psychosocial setting are included.
OTA-103	Adaptive Activities I	This course explores the use of activities in occupational therapy including those that address sensory motor, cognitive, and psycho-social performance components. The student is introduced to activity analysis, methods of instruction, goal setting and cost and supply factors.
OTA-104	Adaptive Activities II	This course is designed to teach students about assistive technology and adaptive devices related to the problem areas commonly seen in physical dysfunction across the lifespan. Students learn to select, design, fabricate, modify and recommend adaptive equipment, including, but not limited to seating, positioning, and splinting, to enable the completion of functional tasks, as well as , how to instruct others on the safe and proper use of adaptive devices. Additional lab hours required.
OTA-203	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy III	This course presents the principles of assessment, interpretation and intervention implementation for deficits and performance limitations associated with physical dysfunction due to various diagnoses. Students are provided a framework to treat clients with physical, sensorimotor, visual, perceptual, and cognitive dysfunction. Clinical reasoning skills necessary for good client-centered decision-making are taught in order to guide intervention that enhances performance in areas of occupation.
OTA-204	Fundamentals of Occupational Therapy IV	The purpose of this course is to provide the student with a foundation in motor development as a basis for selecting treatment techniques and outcomes for the pediatric population. Students are provided opportunities to integrate knowledge of normal development into treatment strategies. 
OTA-207	Health and Disease	This course is an overview of disease conditions typically encountered in occupational therapy practice. Etiology, symptoms and physical and psychological reactions to these conditions are reviewed as well as basic influences contributing to healthy living. Medical terminology along with 
OTA-208	Adaptive Living Skills	The laboratory course presents intervention principles that are utilized in order to improve occupational performance. Students are trained to perform strategies for restoring skills, adaptive and compensatory techniques and methods of addressing activities for daily living for clients across the lifespan.
OTA-213	Occupational Therapy Assistant Practicum I	This full-time 8 week fieldwork practicum is designed to bridge the student from classroom to clinic in preparation for entry level practice as an occupational therapy assistant. Under the supervision of an experienced occupational therapy practitioner, the student participates in an in-depth experience providing occupational therapy services to clients, focusing on the application of purposeful and meaningful occupation. It is designed to promote problem-solving and clinical reasoning appropriate to the occupational therapy assistant role and to develop professionalism and competence in career responsibilities.
OTA-214	Occupational Therapy Assistant Practicum II	This is the second of two full-time 8 week fieldwork practicum designed to bridge the student from classroom to clinic in preparation for entry level practice as an occupational therapy assistant. Under the supervision of an experienced occupational therapy practitioner, the student participates in an in-depth experience providing occupational therapy services to clients, focusing on the application of purposeful and meaningful occupation. It is designed to promote problem-solving and clinical reasoning appropriate to the occupational therapy assistant role and to develop professionalism and competence in career responsibilities.
OTA-215	The Management of Occupational Therapy	This course explores the roles of the occupational therapy assistant in health care delivery. Topics include current trends, documentation, reimbursement, credentialing, ethical standards, Total Quality Management, ethical issues, multicultural diversity, OTR/COTA collaboration and supervision, and evidence-based practice.
OTA-216	Level II Fieldwork Seminar	This is a program culminating course designed to facilitate the transition from student to OTA practitioner. Basic knowledge and skills necessary to enter the workplace are reviewed. There is an emphasis on legal, ethical and professional issues. Certification and licensure preparation as well as job seeking skills are investigated.
PAR-201	Principles of Paramedic Technology I	This course is an overview of Paramedic practice integrating the theory behind the use of advanced diagnostic and treatment procedures into the management of organic, life-threatening emergencies.
PAR-202	Principles of Paramedic Technology II	This course serves as an overview of paramedic practice as well as integrating the theory behind the use of advanced diagnostic and treatment procedures in the management of organic, life-threatening emergencies. Topics include cardiovascular, cerebrovascular and other medical emergencies and their relationship to their respective disease processes.
PAR-203	Pharmacology for Paramedics	This course discusses drug theory and usage by paramedical personnel. Areas of emphasis are general principles of drug action, the mathematics of dosage calculation, the therapeutic effects, indications, contraindications, dosages, administration routes, and possible side effects of emergency drugs. Discussion of important prescription medications and their relationship to emergency treatment.
PAR-211	Paramedic Laboratory I	This course covers the practical skills relating to PAR 201 including patient assessment and history taking techniques, parental infusion techniques, antishock trousers, oxygen administration, airway adjuncts to include endotracheal intubation and cricothyrotomy techniques.
PAR-212	Paramedic Laboratory II	This course covers the practical skills relating to PAR 202 and PAR 226, including patient assessment and history taking techniques with emphasis on ECG interpretation as well as special OB/GYN techniques. At the completion of the semester all skills covered previously will be reviewed. Additional lab hours required.
PAR-221	Paramedic Clinical I	Students provide advanced therapy to hospitalized patients under the supervision of licensed personnel. Additional hours required.
PAR-222	Paramedic Clinical II	Student provides advanced therapy to hospitalized patients under the supervision of licensed personnel. Additional hours required.
PAR-223	Paramedic Internship I	This course is designed specifically for those students who are currently enrolled in Paramedic Technology. Arrangements are made for the student to work with a pre-hospital, advanced life support system under the supervision of licensed personnel. Students will observe and practice the application of paramedic skills. Additional hours required.
PAR-224	Paramedic Internship II	This course is designed specifically for the student who is currently enrolled in PAR 202 and PAR 226. Arrangements are made for the student to work with a pre-hospital, advanced life support system under the supervision of licensed personnel. Student will observe and practice the application of paramedic skills. Additional lab hours required.
PAR-225	Paramedic Internship III	This course is designed specifically for the student who is currently enrolled in Paramedic Technology. Arrangements are made for the student to work with a pre-hospital advanced life support system under the supervision of licensed personnel. Student will observe and practice the application of paramedic skills. Additional hours required.
PAR-226	Principles of Paramedic Technology III	This course integrates the theory behind the use of advanced diagnostic treatment procedures into the practice of the paramedic. Areas of emphasis include infectious disease, OB/GYN, behavior, abuse, geriatrics, hematology and patients with special considerations.
PAR-227	Principles of Paramedic Technology IV	This course integrates the theory behind the use of advanced diagnostic treatment, assessment based management, counseling, rescue and communication procedures into the practice of the paramedic. Areas of emphasis include pediatrics, management of the chronically ill patient, extrication and rescue and communication techniques.
PAR-228	Paramedic Clinical III	Student provides advanced therapy to hospitalized patients under the supervision of licensed personnel. Additional hours required.
PE-100	The National Council on Strength and Fitness Personal Trainer	The National Council on Strength and Fitness Certified Personal Trainer course is designed to synthesize the knowledge acquired from an exercise science curriculum with practical application for successful job performance in the fitness industry. Students will be prepared to practice as personal trainers with a highly regarded, legally-defensible certification. Additional hours required.
PE-103	Aerobic Fitness	This course is designed to develop cardiovascular fitness and flexibility. Student will engage in warm-up, aerobic and stretching exercises through land based activities ranging from walking, jogging, and calisthenics. The student is introduced to the basic principles of developing, assessing, and evaluating aerobic fitness. Additional hours may be required.	
PE-104	Archery	This is an introductory course that focuses on basic archery rules, skills, terminology, and equipment. Techniques of shooting including stance, draw, aim, release and follow through of a compound bow are introduced. Columbia rounds and intraclass competition are performed.	
PE-105	Deep Water Exercise	This course is designed to promote cardiovascular fitness. Assisted by flotation devices students will engage in warm-up, aerobic, and muscle toning exercises in a suspended state, thereby avoiding hard impact on joints. Recommended for individuals who have excess weight, knee or back problems. Additional hours required.	
PE-106	Backpacking and Hiking	This course is an introduction to leisure-time activities of hiking, backpacking, and camping skills. Food and hydration preparations, choice of proper hiking-camping apparel, campsite development, safety and sanitation are explored. This course requires two one-day trail hikes (roughly 10 miles) and one weekend camping trip. Each student is responsible for his/her own equipment and transportation to and from the campsite. Additional hours required.	
PE-107	Baseball I	Indoor/outdoor instruction in hitting, fielding, throwing, baserunning, conditioning, bunting, strategy, position play.	
PE-109	Basic Fitness I	This course is an introductory course that focuses on fitness principles and exercise techniques used to develop strength, muscular endurance, flexibility, and cardio-respiratory fitness. A variety of physical activities and exercises will be introduced.	
PE-110	Basic Fitness II	This course focuses on the development of strength and cardio-respiratory fitness. Fitness principles, various types of exercises, and the role of eating patterns are identified to enhance a healthy lifestyle. Focus will be placed on students designing their own workout routines.
PE-111	Basketball I	Basics of ball handling, shooting, offense, defense, team play, conditioning.	
PE-116	Bowling I	This course is an introduction of basic fundamentals and techniques including starting positions, the push away, footwork, and arm swing used in the approach and delivery. Instruction includes history, rules, safety, strategies, scoring, and handicapping. This course is held at a nearby bowling facility and there is an additional fee for equipment rental.	
PE-117	Bowling II	This course expands on skills including adjustments to lane conditions, approach, developing a strike ball, picking all spare and split combinations; individual and team competition. This course is held at a nearby bowling facility and there is an additional fee for equipment rental.
PE-118	Camping and Floating	This course introduces the fundamentals of outdoor living including camping skills, cooking, campsite development, shelter, canoeing, and selection and care of equipment. The course includes and overnight float trip on Missouri Rivers.	
PE-119	Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries	The course is designed to introduce the student to selected aspects of athletic training. Material of the course provides sufficient background in anatomy, physiology, and kinesiology for those new to the study. Student will observe and participate in the sequence of injury prevention, initial care, and treatment with use of therapeutic modalities, and therapeutic rehabilitation of athletic injuries.
PE-120	Community Red Cross CPR	This course provides physiological principles of cardio-pulmonary functions with practical application in administering this lifesaving technique and use of an automated external defibrillator. Certification through the American Red Cross adult, child and infant Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and Automated External Defibrillation (AED) available for those who meet course requirements. Addition fee is required to obtain certification.	
PE-122	Dance Aerobics I	This course is an introduction to continuous rhythmic movements and steps to encourage this enjoyable physical activity to be part of a healthy lifestyle. Workout sessions incorporate various genres of music designed for all fitness levels to improve cardio-respiratory fitness, flexibility, muscle toning and strengthening, and coordination.	
PE-123	Dance Aerobics II	This course is a continuation of Dance Aerobics I (PE 122) with emphasis on strengthening the cardio-respiratory system, improving muscle tone and flexibility, and promoting weight loss through rhythmic movements and steps. Various genres of music accompany workouts, which include floor aerobics, step aerobics, and low-and high-impact movements.
PE-126	Fencing I	This is an introductory course that focuses on basic fencing rules and skills including attacks, parries, strategy, and rules.  Intraclass competition is performed.	
PE-127	Fencing II	This course is a refinement of techniques learned in Fencing I. Foil and Epee, advanced parries, attacks and electric equipment are introduced. Intraclass competition is performed.
PE-128	Fencing III	This course focuses on the development of offensive and defensive techniques for Sabre fencing. Rules, terminology and etiquette are addressed. Basic strategies of bouting are introduced.
PE-129	First Aid	This course includes emergency recognition and first aid treatment for sudden illness and injuries with adult cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and automated external defibrillator (AED). First Aid and CPR/AED certification is available through the one of the following certifying agencies:  American Red Cross, National Safety Council, or American Heart Association. This course may be taken to satisfy one credit hour of the physical education requirement.
PE-130	Fitness Center I	This course provides basic fitness principles, awareness of healthy food choices, and physical activities for students to improve health and well-being. Active participation in physical activities for the development of muscular strength and endurance, flexibility, and cardiorespiratory fitness is required.	
PE-131	Fitness Center II	This course is a continuation of PE 130 with consideration given to concepts of body composition and weight management through healthy food selection and physical activities. Active participation is self-guided physical activities to improve muscular strength and endurance, cardiorespiratory fitness, and flexibility is required.
PE-132	Total Fitness	This course is a continuation of PE 131 with consideration given to self-directed lifetime fitness for health and well-being. Performance of physical activities is required. Advanced training techniques for improving muscular strength and endurance, cardiorespiratory fitness, and flexibility are explored. Additional hours required.
PE-133	Golf	Basic fundamentals such as swing, club selection, putting, rules and etiquette are covered. Clubs are not provided.	
PE-135	Health and Personal Hygiene	This is an introduction to the concept of health being a foundation for positive movement throughout the life cycle. The course will explore the inter-relatedness of the body systems, the nature and communication of disease and the recovery process. Course topics will include healthy eating, fitness, sexuality, drugs, stress, and wellness.
PE-136	Ice Skating	This is an introductory course on basic skills and techniques of ice skating including attire and equipment. Course is held at local skating rink and there is an additional fee for skate rental.	
PE-137	Judo I	This course (translated as "gentle way") is designed to introduce students to the Olympic sport. Focus on fundamental skills and techniques of falling, throwing, grappling, holding, and recognition of choking, and arm locks. Students will explore basic terminology, etiquette, and history and rules of the sport. Emphasis will be placed on safety and controlled execution of techniques.	
PE-138	Judo II	This course is a continuation of Judo I (translated as "gentle way"). Introduction to intermediate and advanced skills and techniques of  falling, throwing (Nage Waza), grappling (Katame Waza or Ne Waza), holding (Osaekomi Waza), choking (Shime Waza), and joint locks (Kansetsu Waza). Students will explore advanced terminology, rules of competitive Judo, match scoring system and strategies for scoring points in Judo competition. Emphasis will be placed on safety and controlled execution of techniques.
PE-139	Karate I	This course focuses on basic techniques of blocking, striking, and kicking. Combined techniques with emphasis on form, correct timing, distance, and focus will be introduced. Emphasis will be placed on safety and controlled execution of techniques.	
PE-140	Karate II	This course is continued study of Karate I techniques. Advanced Japanese terms and dojo (Karate environment) rules are introduced. Emphasis on advanced skills including combination techniques of punching, striking, blocking, and kicking for offensive and defense situations. Advanced Katas and Kumite are introduced.
PE-142	Lifeguard Training	This course is designed to provide knowledge and skills to recognize and demonstrate appropriate response to an aquatic emergency. Techniques and skills of proper pool sanitation and maintenance will be introduced. Successful completion of this course provides an opportunity to complete American Red Cross Lifeguard Certification. First Aid/CPR for the professional rescuer is included. Additional hours required.
PE-145	Personal Defense I	Basic techniques of hand-to-hand defense including jujitsu and karate. Basic throws, attacks, blocks and releases. General rules of safety and prevention of attack situations are covered.	
PE-158	Soccer	This is an introductory course that focuses on the principles and basic skills of soccer including ball handling, dribbling, trapping, passing, shooting, heading, throwing, goal tending, position play, team play, and rules of the game. Interclass competition is performed.	
PE-159	Softball I	This is an introductory course that focuses on basic softball rules and skills including hitting, fielding, throwing, base running, bunting, strategy, conditioning, position play. Interclass competition is performed.	
PE-161	Stress Management	This course includes an overview of stress and its impact on physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual health and wellness. Coping strategies, relaxation techniques, healthy eating behaviors, and physical activities for stress reduction will be explored.
PE-162	Swimming I (Beginning/Elementary)	This course is designed to promote comfort in an aquatic environment and to introduce skills and techniques of swimming and basic water safety. Each skill will be demonstrated, explained, and evaluated. Strokes taught include front crawl, back crawl, side stroke, elementary back, breast stroke, and butterfly. Additional hours may be required.	
PE-163	Swimming II (All Levels)	Intermediate course in swimming includes all strokes survival swimming, endurance, elementary rescues, plus recreational water games.	
PE-165	Tai Chi I	Tai Chi I is an introduction to the history, philosophy, and movements of the soft form of ancient Chinese martial arts. This low-impact activity is comprised of slow, full-body movements using all muscle groups throughout the full joint range of motion. Active participation is required in this course. Tai Chi will improve posture and balance, muscle strength, cardiovascular fitness, kinesthetics (body awareness), and concentration. Various styles may be introduced to promote physical and mental well-being.	
PE-166	Tai Chi II	Tai Chi II is a continuation of Tai Chi I. Meditation, breathing techniques, and Chinese terms for advanced movements and postures of Hun Yuan Chen style will be introduced. Emphasis will be placed on advanced Tai Chi movements through active participation.	
PE-167	Team Sports I	This course is designed to emphasize the importance of team play in sports activities. Indoor and outdoor activities include: flag football, kickball, volleyball, softball, soccer, basketball, and ultimate frisbee.	
PE-169	Tennis I	This course is an introduction to the game of tennis. Physical skills (e.g., racket grip, serves, shots, and footwork) and strategic play for "singles" and "doubles" play will be introduced.	
PE-170	Tennis II	This course is an extension of Tennis I. Continued emphasis on physical skills and strategy will be examined and practiced.
PE-171	Volleyball I	This is an introductory course that focuses on basic volleyball rules and skills including passing, serving, setting, spiking, and scoring. Interclass competition is performed.	
PE-172	Volleyball II	This course focuses on the continuation and progression from Volleyball I including history, rules, advanced skills, and strategies. Competitive team play is performed.
PE-173	Walking for Fitness	This course focuses on the proper technique and attire, and the importance of cardiovascular fitness, weight control, and safety.	
PE-174	Water Aerobics	This course is designed to promote cardiovascular fitness, improve muscle strength, muscle endurance, and flexibility. A variety of water exercises are introduced to meet the needs of the student. Non-swimmers can participate in this course. Additional hours may be required.	
PE-177	Weight Training I	This course is designed to introduce the beginner to a variety of basic weight training skills. Techniques focus on safe execution of weight lifting using pin-select weight equipment and free weights to develop strength, size, endurance, and flexibility of major muscle groups. Circuit training is introduced.	
PE-178	Weight Training II	This course focuses on advanced weight lifting techniques utilizing pin-select machines and free weights. Advanced level training programs for increased muscular development are designed. Circuit training is utilized.
PE-180	Wellness and Fitness Concepts	This course focuses on the impact physical activity, healthy eating behaviors, weight management, stress management, substance abuse, sexually transmitted diseases and other relevant topics have on health and wellness. The development of an individualized wellness program enhances understanding of course concepts. Additional hours required.
PE-181	Yoga I (Beginning)	This course is an introduction to Hatha Yoga (the Yoga of physical wellbeing), which includes basic poses (asanas), breathing techniques, meditation, and yoga philosophy. Active participation in these activities is designed to increase flexibility and balance, strengthen and tone muscles, and energize the body to reduce stress and enhance physical and mental health.	
PE-182	Yoga II (All Levels/Intermediate)	This course is a continuation of PE 181, which is an introduction to Hatha Yoga (the Yoga of physical well-being). Active participation and emphasis on awareness and internal focus while practicing advanced yoga asanas (poses), pranayama (controlled breath), and meditation. Performance of these skills and techniques will increase muscle strength and endurance, increase flexibility and balance, improve body posture, reduce stress, and enhance relaxation.
PE-191	Body Contouring	This course is an exercise class using resistance in the form of free weights and elastic bands to develop the figure, posture, flexibility and muscle tone. Nutrition strategies will be discussed.	
PE-192	Cardio-Flex	Emphasis in cardiovascular fitness, techniques of walking, low impact movement patterns set to music, weight control, and conditioning stretches to improve flexibility.	
PE-220	American Heart Association Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) for Healthcare Providers	This course is designed to prepare students in healthcare professions with basic life support and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR). Students will learn how to recognize cardiac arrest, give chest compressions, deliver ventilations, and provide early use of an automated external defibrillator (AED) individually and with a partner. Adult, child, and infant rescue techniques including choking will be part of this course. American Heart Association Basic Life Support (BLS) for Healthcare Providers certification is available for those who meet the course requirements. Additional fee is required to obtain certification.
PED-116	Pilates	Pilates, a form of physical conditioning for all fitness levels, is introduced as well as an introduction to the history of Pilates and basic concepts of alignment, centering, breathing, stabilization, and balance. Active participation is required for non-impact floor exercises using specialized equipment to develop muscle strength, flexibility, posture, and inner awareness.	
PED-140	Beginning Rock Climbing	This course provides students with the necessary information and skills required to rock climb indoors safely and effectively. Students will gain knowledge in climbing equipment and its proper usage, climbing terminology, warm-up and stretching exercises, basic climbing techniques and mental and physical training specifically for climbing. Additional fees apply. Additional hours required.	
PED-201	Psychological Perspective in Exercise and Sport	Sport and exercise psychology is the scientific study of people and behaviors in sport and exercise activities and the practical application of that knowledge. This course focuses on two areas of study:  (1) learning how psychological factors affect an individual's physical performance and (2) understanding how participation in sport and exercise affects a person's psychological development, health, and well-being.
PHL-101	Introduction to Philosophy	This course is an introduction to philosophical inquiry through a study of such perennial problems as the nature of truth and the possibility of knowledge, the mind-body relation, the nature and basis of morality, the nature and possibility of free will and the nature and existence of God. The course incorporates both classical and contemporary readings.
PHL-102	Introduction to Logic	Introduction to Logic includes the methods for critically evaluating reasoning and constructing valid arguments. The course may include the techniques of both traditional (syllogistic) and symbolic logic. Informal logic (language definition and fallacies) is to be covered.
PHL-103	World Religions	This is an introductory course examining the nature and function of religion in human experience and culture and an introduction to the history, content and present status of selected world religions such as Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Confucianism, Islam, Judaism and Christianity.
PHL-104	Ethics	This course is an introductory survey of the basic issues and approaches in the field of ethics, with the aim of showing the relevance of philosophical inquiry to contemporary moral concerns. Questions concerning the good life, the nature and content of morality, and the relation of the individual to the standards of society will be considered.
PHL-105	Black Philosophy	Major philosophical and ideological themes in Black life in the Western and Non-Western world are explored. Black nationalism, Race, Black values, pan-Africanism, African socialism and other views may be included.
PHL-109	Bio-Medical Ethics	This course is an analysis of a range of moral issues related to the fields of medicine and biotechnical engineering from the standpoint of philosophical ethical theories.
PHL-111	Environmental Ethics	This introductory course examines human beings' ethical relationship with the natural environment. Topics include environmental ethical frameworks (e.g., biocentrism), animal rights, obligations to future generations, population and consumption, climate change and environmental justice. Some issues are viewed through various cultural and religious lenses. The course incorporates primarily contemporary readings.
PHL-112	Business Ethics	This course explores the ethical dimensions of the world of business are analyzed from a philosophical perspective. Using theories drawn from philosophy, students will evaluate business case studies with respect to such topics as personal and corporate responsibility and the obligations of justice.
PHL-114	Philosophy of Religion	This introductory course examines philosophical issues as they relate to Western religious thought. Topics may include arguments for the existence of God, the problem of evil, the relationship between faith and reason, the role of miracles and religious experience, and the religious foundations of morality. This course incorporates traditional and contemporary readings.
PHY-111	College Physics I	This course is the first semester of a two-semester non-calculus physics sequence. The entire sequence covers topics in mechanics, heat, sound, electricity, magnetism, optics and modern physics. Additional lab hours required.
PHY-112	College Physics II	This course is the second semester of a two-semester non-calculus physics sequence. The entire sequence covers topics in mechanics, heat, sound, electricity, magnetism, optics and modern physics. Additional lab hours required.
PHY-122	Engineering Physics I	This course is the first semester of a two-semester calculus-level physics sequence. The entire sequence covers topics in mechanics, heat and thermodynamics, optics, electricity and magnetism, with mechanics being one of the topics covered in the first semester. Additional lab hours required. 
PHY-223	Engineering Physics II	This course is the second semester of a two-semester calculus-level physics sequence. The entire sequence covers topics in mechanics, heat and thermodynamics, optics, electricity and magnetism, with electricity, magnetism, and optics being among the topics included in the second semester. Additional lab hours required.
PHY-224	Engineering Physics III	The third semester of a three-semester, calculus-level physics sequence. The entire sequence covers topics in mechanics, heat and thermodynamics optics, electricity and magnetism, and nuclear and atomic physics, with modern (nuclear and atomic) physics being the primary topics included in the third semester. Additional lab hours required.
PRD-102	Career Exploration	Career Exploration emphasizes students learning about themselves as well as about the world of work. Students will learn to identify accurate career information and resources. They will also learn a decision making model to assist them in their career selection process.	
PRD-106	Relaxation Training	This is a course for students who are dealing with increasing expectations and pressures. Participants will learn to identify when and how they experience stress in themselves. The material covered will include the causes of stress, individual assessments, relaxation techniques, methods of handling interpersonal stress, and audio tapes. Students will be asked to actively practice and utilize the techniques.	
PRD-107	Explorations for Women I	In a group setting women will be provided the opportunity to explore their self-concepts and expectations of themselves and of the world, as well as to experiment with new directions for their personal growth. The group will use a variety of activities to help each member to become aware of her strengths, her needs and her patterns of communication and behavior, and to formulate personal goals and experiment with programs to achieve them.	
PRD-108	Personal Growth and Identity	1-2	This course is designed to involve participants in the process of seeing themselves more clearly having more available alternatives in their interaction with others, together with a clear perception of their own uniqueness. This class will be organized with a group discussion format emphasizing self-exploration.	
PRD-109	Habit Change	Learn what the experts have discovered about changing a habit; use this information to overcome a self-defeating habit or develop a healthy habit. Possible goals  quitting smoking or drinking, starting an exercise program, controlling overeating, etc. Topics will include the stages of change, twelve change processes, and rebounding from relapse.	
PRD-110	Learning to Cope with Test Anxiety	This course is designed to help students learn to desensitize themselves (systematically) to anxieties associated with the taking of tests. In the academic setting these "tests" may come in the form of quizzes, exams, oral reports, or contributions to class discussions. Students who will find this course beneficial are those who typically "freeze up" or "go blank" because of excessive anxiety leading up to and during testing situations, and as a result do not attain their level of competence.	
PRD-114	Coping with Stress	This course explores the physical and psychological nature of stress. Topics may include the practical application of various coping strategies, anxiety resolution, systematic desensitization and transferable skills necessary for student success.	
PRD-121	Personal Success	The focus of this course is the enhancement of the student's self-esteem. The opportunity is provided for students to review their self-esteem in a variety of life areas (family, work, friends, education) and consider ways in which they work to enhance it. A number of self-initiating behaviors that persons of all ages may adopt to enhance self-esteem will be explored.	
PRD-122	Learning Through Service	This course is designed for students who are seeking to expand leaning in a designated academic or personal development course they are taking, reinforce academic and career goals, continue previous Service-Learning Projects, enhance their level of civic engagement and to learn more about the world of work in a non-profit agency. Additional hours required.	
PRD-126	Parenting	This course will provide students with a forum for addressing a variety of parenting issues. In a structured group setting, students will explore and practice skills to increase parenting options and awareness. Topics include discipline, nutrition, social influences, and the role of parents, both in single and multiple parent households.
PRD-128	Mental Health First Aid	Mental Health First Aid is a certification course designed to assist participants in giving first aid to individuals experiencing a mental health crisis and/or who are in the early stages of a mental health disorder. The course teaches an appropriate response plan and the signs and symptoms of common health problems  anxiety, depression, psychosis, eating disorders and substance use disorders.
PSC-101	Introduction to American Politics	Introduction to American Politics surveys the American political system. Basic values, past and current Constitutional issues, government processes and institutions, and citizen rights are discussed in a modern framework. National, state, and local political issues are covered.
PSC-103	State and Local Politics	State and Local Politics is a study of the political patterns of the American states and their formal and informal relationships to local governments. Special emphasis is placed on urban, suburban, and metropolitan politics.
PSC-104	British Politics and Society	This course introduces students to some of the main institutions and issues of contemporary British politics and society. Through lectures, videos, text assignments, and field trips, students will explore government in 21st-century Britain.
PSC-201	International Relations	International Relations looks at the politics and policies among nations. Topics discussed include theories of international politics, levels of foreign policy analysis, conflict and peace, terrorism, globalization, international political economy, and the specific foreign policies of great, middle, and small states.
PSC-205	Constitutional Issues	Constitutional Issues covers the concepts of American federalism, civil liberties, civil rights, and the responsibilities of citizenship. Basic values, current constitutional controversies, and citizen rights are discussed in a modern framework with particular emphasis upon important U.S. case law.
PSC-211	United States Foreign Policy, 1898 to Present	Surveying developments from the late nineteenth century to present, United State Foreign Policy explore the historical and theoretical context of how U.S. observers have improvised a national relationship with the world. Topics addressed will include, among other, the origin and aftermath of two world wars, the Cold War and its demise, and the development of security, economic, and humanitarian crises in the post-Cole War Period.
PSI-101	Physical Science	This course is a survey of the fundamental principles of physics and chemistry with applications to geology, astronomy and meteorology. The course is designed for students in non-science and career curricula.
PSI-105	Physical Science I	A lecture/laboratory introduction to science with special subject adaptations for students in non-science and career programs. Additional lab hours required.
PSI-111	Introduction to Astronomy I	This course introduces the fundamental concepts and principles of our knowledge of the Universe. The topics covered include the Earth, Solar System, stars, galaxies and evolution of the Universe. The course is designed for students in non-science and career curricula.
PSI-115	Observational Astronomy	An introduction to astronomical observations, techniques and instruments, which may accompany PSI 111 or PSI 112 (Introduction to Astronomy I or II) or may be taken independently. No prior knowledge of astronomy is assumed. Additional lab hours required.
PSI-123	Meteorology	This physical science course introduces the student to the basic concepts involved in the analysis of weather phenomena on the global and local scale. Topics include, heat balance, atmospheric stability, precipitation processes, pressure systems, air masses, fronts, clouds, the jet stream, air-ocean interaction (El Nino and La Nina), thunderstorm and severe weather, hurricanes, and an introduction to weather forecasting. Particular attention devoted to current weather analysis.
PSY-125	Human Sexuality	Human sexuality includes not only the biological component of male and female sexuality, but also attitudes, values and feelings about one's own gender and sex role. Consequently, in dealing with sex as a natural biological function, the expression of which is a dimension of psychosocial behavior, the sexual development and/or differentiation of men and women from conception to maturity will be stressed. Same course as BIO 122.
PSY-200	General Psychology	This course is an introduction to the scientific study of human behavior. It attempts to help students gain insights into their own and others' behavior. A variety of topics (such as personality, learning, emotion, motivation, human growth and development, abnormal behavior and psychotherapy) relating to psychological development will be covered.
PSY-203	Child Psychology	This course is an overview of child psychology  the scientific study of the psychological basis of child growth and development. Emotional, mental, physical and social needs and developmental processes of infancy, childhood and adolescence are covered; nature and nurture interactions and processes during prenatal development and pregnancy are also covered. This course includes an analysis of a variety of home, school and community factors as they interact to influence behavior, personality, and development. 
PSY-205	Human Growth and Development	This course is a survey of the basis of human growth and development. Biological, cognitive and socioemotional needs of children, adolescents and adults are reviewed. The multiple factors which influence and shape behavior and personality are analyzed.
PSY-206	Introduction to Social Psychology	This course is an overview of social psychology, the scientific study of how people think about, influence, and relate to one another. Specifically this course explores social thinking, social influence, social relations, and the application of social psychological processes. Specific topics include  conformity, obedience, persuasion, group influence, prejudice, attraction, aggression, and prosocial behavior.
PSY-208	Abnormal Psychology	This course is a survey of mental disorders as categorized in the American Psychological Association's Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. The symptoms, causes and treatments of various mental disorders will be covered. This includes  anxiety disorders, mood disorders, eating disorders, somatic complaint related disorders, dissociative disorders, substance abuse disorders, sexual dysfunctions and disorders and schizophrenia.
PSY-210	Personality and Adjustment	An examination of the contributions of the major schools of human personality and its expression in patterns of adjustment and growth as well as in dysfunctional behavioral patterns. Theories surveyed will represent dynamic, humanistic, cognitive and behavioral perspectives. Adjustment issues include  self concept, social environment and role adaptation, self-management, maladjustment, remediation and treatment.
PSY-213	Psychology of Aging	An examination of normal and pathological aging changes in personality, sensory mechanisms, intelligence, creativity, and sexuality with some emphasis on methods of treatment.
PSY-214	Adolescent Psychology	This course is an overview of adolescent psychology, the study of the individual from puberty to young adulthood. The course explores the physiological, cognitive, social, and emotional changes in adolescence, specifically examining the biological basis and environmental contributions to adolescent thought and behavior. Issues facing adolescents will also be discussed including gender, self, family, peers, sexuality, education, work, and problems in adolescence.
PSY-215	Brain and Behavior	This course examines the basic mechanisms of neuronal structure, function and communication. Behavioral functions studied include  sensations and perception, emotion and drives, learning and memory, vision, sleep and dreams, stress, addiction, language, aging effects, sex differences, and disorders.
PSY-216	Psychology of Gender	This course encompasses the psychological and cultural examination of gender, gender roles, and socialization. This course also explores issues related to stereotyping, gender differences and similarities, and mental health. Students will be challenged to critically evaluate research examining sex differences and ways in which gender is constructed within society.
PSY-218	Addiction and Compulsive Behavior	This course explores the dynamics and scope of addiction and compulsive behavior in human experience. Unlike a course strictly devoted to substance abuse, this course examines the extent to which a chemical dependency model of addiction is applicable to other forms of compulsive behavior.
PSY-219	Freud and Psychoanalysis	This course examines the life and thought of Sigmund Freud, the founder of psychoanalysis, as the necessary background for understanding the major developments in psychoanalytic theory. The goal is to provide students with an introductory overview of the central concepts of psychoanalytic theory and practice.
PSY-220	The Psychology of Homicide and Crime	This course is an introduction to the psychological study of various types of homicide and crime. A variety of topics related to the psychological signature of serial killing, mass murder and spree killing will be analyzed, including cases such as the Green River Serial Killings and the Boston Marathon bombing.
PTA-100	Introduction to Physical Therapist Assistant	This course provides an introduction to the professional field of physical therapy and the role of the physical therapist assistant in the health care system. Legal and ethical questions are discussed as well as interpersonal communication skills, personality types, and the importance of empathy and respect for all patients. Students are introduced to medical terminology, documentation, and case studies in PT. A semester long service learning project is included to improve active listening skills and personal awareness.
PTA-104	Clinical Experience I	Students will have the opportunity to practice communication, interpersonal, technical and administrative skills acquired in the first year of study in a clinical facility under the direction and supervision of a licensed clinical instructor for three weeks.
PTA-105	Fundamentals of Patient Care for the PTA	This course is an introduction to the basic patient care skills in physical therapy. Treatment procedures include patient positioning, transfer techniques, massage, gait with and without assistive devices, wheelchair management and architectural barriers. Emphasis throughout is on safety, the preparation of the patient physically and psychologically, appropriate PTA/patient interaction, and patient/caregiver teaching. Additional lab hours required.
PTA-208	Health Occupation Seminar	This course is a study of the health care system and the role of PTA within it. Topics include health care organizations; department policies and procedures; evidence based research; professionalism; legal and ethical issues, community resources, documentation, billing, and coding; and application for licensure and work.
PTA-211	Physical Agents	This course provides PTA students with scientific knowledge and clinical application skills required to safely and efficiently provide treatment under the direction of a PT with the following physical agents  thermal agents, compression therapies, traction, cryotherapy, hydrotherapy, light and sound agents, and electrotherapeutic modalities. Additional lab hours required.
PTA-212	Therapeutic Exercise and Rehabilitation Concepts I	This course covers data collection and intervention techniques used by the PTA under the direction and supervision of the PT in the treatment of arthritis, postural abnormalities, extremity and spinal dysfunctions, abnormal gait, cardiopulmonary conditions, and amputations. The principles and application of prosthetic and orthotic devices will also be included. Additional hours required.
PTA-213	Therapeutic Exercise and Rehabilitation Concepts II	This course includes data collection and treatment intervention techniques performed by the PTA under the direction and supervision of the PT for pediatric and neurological conditions. The role of the PTA in assisting the PT to identify community integration barriers for clients with physical disabilities will also be discussed.  Additional lab hours required.
PTA-214	Data Collection and Intervention Techniques for the PTA	An introductory course on data collection and intervention techniques used by the PTA which includes vital signs, sterile techniques, dressing changes, emergency procedures, goniometry, muscle testing, cardiovascular response to exercise, and gait. In addition the basic concepts of exercise and techniques to develop flexibility, strength, power, and endurance will be taught.  Additional lab hours required.
PTA-215	Medical Conditions in Rehabilitation	This course is an overview of disease conditions commonly seen for treatment in physical therapy departments.
PTA-216	Clinical Education IIA	Students will have the opportunity to practice skills acquired in the first and second year of the program in a clinical facility under the direction and supervision of a clinical instructor for 6 weeks.
PTA-217	Clinical Education IIB	Students will have the opportunity to practice skills acquired in the first and second year of the program in clinical facility under the direction and supervision of a clinical instructor 6 weeks.
QC-100	Introduction to Quality Control	A course that teaches the basic theories and concepts of quality control. Emphasis will be placed on the current technology used in quality control. Topics covered will include organization structure, collection of quality related information, quality engineering and total quality control. Computer applications and quality control software will be utilized to develop graphical analysis and diagnosis of symptoms. Quality planning principles will be introduced as a method of quality improvement.
QC-102	Quality Cost Analysis	A survey course on the elements of product costs as they relate to quality. Direct quality cost, prevention, appraisal and failure and indirect quality cost  consumer incurred, customer dissatisfaction will be discussed in detail. The collection and evaluation of cost data as related to quality will be developed on a measurement base that is sensitive to change.
QC-200	Quality Assurance	Advanced course on the scope and function of quality assurance. Topics covered include vendor selection, records, procurement methods and data analysis. The subject of quality standards will be covered and students will be instructed in quality audit techniques.
QC-202	Inspection Methods	This course will introduce the subject of inspection as it relates to the product or process specification. The location of various inspection functions, type of inspection plans, the inspection standard and inspection organization will be discussed. Inspection records keeping and tool calibration will be developed for a typical inspection function.
QC-206	Statistical Quality Control I	Introduction to frequency distributions and the normal curve. Concepts of variation, statistical process control and process capability. Pre-control, control charts for variables and attributes, and SPC techniques for short runs will be discussed.
QC-208	Statistical Quality Control II	Fundamentals of probability and probability distributions. Development and use of acceptance sampling plans and operating characteristic curves. Introduction of a wide assortment of sampling strategies and hypothesis testing.
QC-212	Quality Tools for Advanced Manufacturing	This advanced course covers tools used in a manufacturing environment. Topics covered include quality attitude, quality statistics, probability, the tools of quality, process improvement, metrology, and computer generated charts and graphs.
RDG-016	Developmental Reading	This course is designed to help students expand the range of their reading comprehension and vocabulary skills.
RDG-017	Developmental Reading Lab	This is an individualized course designed to develop reading comprehension and vocabulary. Additional lab hours required.
RDG-020	Reading Improvement	This course is designed to help students gain greater understanding of written material and to improve reading vocabulary.
RDG-021	Reading Improvement Lab	This course provides individualized practice under the supervision of a reading instructor. Additional lab hours required.	
RDG-030	Introduction to College Reading	This course is designed to develop college-level reading comprehension, vocabulary and study skills.
RDG-031	Introduction to College Reading Lab	This course provides individualized practice under the supervision of a reading instructor. Additional lab hours required.	
RDG-050	Spelling Improvement	This course is designed for students who wish to improve their spelling skills. Students are allowed to progress at their own rates.	
RDG-052	Vocabulary Improvement	This course will promote vocabulary growth through the study of word parts, understanding words in context and specific development of specialized vocabularies.	
RDG-053	Vocabulary Improvement Lab	This course will promote vocabulary growth through the study of word parts, understanding words in context and specific development of specialized vocabularies. In this class, the instruction is individualized. Students are allowed to progress at their own rates. Additional lab hours required.	
RDG-054	Study Skills and Notetaking	This course is designed as an introduction to general study skills.	
RDG-055	Study Skills and Notetaking Lab	This course is designed as an introduction to general study skills. In this class, the instruction is individualized. Students are allowed to progress at their own rates. Additional lab hours required.	
RDG-100	College Reading and Study Skills	This is an advanced course emphasizing reading in the content areas. The major focus is on study techniques applicable to transfer level courses.
RTH-120	Introduction to Respiratory Care and Respiratory Physics	This course is an introduction to the field of Respiratory Care. Instruction includes; the historical perspective of respiratory care professional organizations, and the principles of physics, as they apply to respiratory care. The theory and laboratory applications for; cylinders, regulators, flowmeters, analyzers, blenders, oxygen administration devices, aerosol and humidity therapy and nebulizers will be presented. A programmed presentation for medical terminology, mathematics, and computer applications are also presented.
RTH-121	Orientation to the Hospital	Topics to be covered in this course include  hospital and departmental organization, medical ethics, patient's rights, legal responsibilities, and hospital visitation. Theory, application and equipment for patient assessment and life vital signs.
RTH-125	Airway Management	Anatomy and physiology of the upper and lower airway. Theory, application and equipment for the management of the airway for the conscious and unconscious patient. Topics to include  artificial airways, resuscitation devices, chest physiotherapy, and secretion removal. Additional lab hours required.
RTH-126	Introduction to Mechanical Ventilation	This course will present information relevant to positive pressure techniques, and how they applied in mechanical ventilatory support. Basic indications and hazards of positive pressure therapies will be presented along with the technical components of intermittent positive pressure breathing, non-invasive positive pressure support, adult and pediatric mechanical ventilators. A two-hour per week laboratory session will enable the learner to observe and practice the principles of operation of mechanical ventilators prior to their hospital experience. Practice in the patient simulator laboratory is also included.
RTH-127	Respiratory Pharmacology	Basic pharmacologic principles, classification of drugs, the effects, side-effects, and hazards of the medications used in cardiopulmonary medicine.
RTH-128	Arterial Blood Gases	The theory and application of Henderson-Hasselbach Equation, oxygen dissociation curve, oxygen uptake, transport, and consumption, oxygen and carbon exchange, renal physiology, and arterial and venous gas tensions. Clinical application of obtaining arterial samples, and interpretation of results.
RTH-131	Pediatric Respiratory Care	This course provides a presentation on pediatric and neonatal respiratory care to include; embryonic development of the cardiopulmonary system, cardiopulmonary malformations, and lung disease. The course will also cover the technical aspects of assessment, equipment, and maintenance of pediatric neonatal respiratory care devices, including mechanical ventilator systems. A two-hour per week laboratory session will enable the learner to observe and demonstrate the skills essential to pediatric and neonatal respiratory care. Additional lab hours required.
RTH-140	Respiratory Care Clinical I	Application of respiratory care principles in the hospital setting. Additional hours required.
RTH-146	Clinical Level II	Application of respiratory care principles in the hospital. Additional hours required.
RTH-220	Pulmonary Pathophysiology	The etiology, pathology, symptomology, and treatment of various lung diseases, to include  C.O.P.D., asthma, restrictive lung disorders, infectious lung diseases, occupational lung diseases, pulmonary neoplasms, and pulmonary manifestations of other disease states.
RTH-221	Critical Care Monitoring 	The theory and clinical aspects of invasive and noninvasive hemodynamic monitoring to include  anatomy and physiology of the heart and vascular systems, equipment, procedures, and interpretation of results, the theory, application, and interpretation of basic electrocardiography.
RTH-222	Cardiopulmonary Physiology	A detailed discussion of the normal physiologic principles utilized by the cardiopulmonary system, to include  neurogenesis of breathing, reflexes governing respiration, properties of elastance, resistance, compliance, and conductance, the physiologic properties of the pulmonary and systemic vascular systems.
RTH-223	Mechanical Ventilation: A Clinical Approach	This course will cover the clinical applications of mechanical ventilation, to include; ventilator commitment, discontinuance and weaning techniques, the maintenance of a patient on a mechanical ventilator. The hazards and side effects of positive and negative pressure mechanical ventilation, and the management of chronic ventilator-dependent patients is also covered. Recent development in mechanical ventilation such as inverse-ratio ventilation, APRV, and the interpretation of waveforms graphics will be covered. Demonstrations in the patient simulator laboratory are mandatory. Additional lab hours required. 
RTH-225	Pulmonary Function Testing	The theory application and equipment for the purpose of diagnosing respiratory pathologies through the measurement of lung gas volumes, capacities, and flows. Includes evaluation through stress (exercise) testing and pulmonary rehabilitation. Additional lab hours required. 
RTH-228	N.B.R.C. Review	A comprehensive review of the major components of respiratory care as they apply to the N.B.R.C. matrix for the entry-level and advanced practitioner exams. Including testing methodologies, strategies, evaluations, and simulated testing experiences; extensive simulated testing for entry-level, written and clinical simulations.
RTH-240	Respiratory Care Clinical III	Application of respiratory care principles in the hospital setting. Additional hours required.
RTH-245	Respiratory Care Clinical IV	Application of respiratory care principles in the hospital setting. Additional hours required.
RUS-101	Elementary Russian I	This course introduces students to basic vocabulary and structures necessary to participate in elementary Russian conversations. Students also begin reading short Russian passages and learn about Russian culture. Emphasis is on using the Russian language in everyday situations.
RUS-102	Elementary Russian II	A continuation of RUS 101. Students complete the basic elements of Russian grammar, increase their vocabulary and gain added facility in speaking and reading Russian.
SKT-102	Aerospace Assembly - Sheet Metal I	This course is designed to prepare students for entry into the fabrication of sheet metal assemblies for the aircraft production industry. The course provides entry-level skills in hole preparation and installation of fasteners, including rivets, lockbolts, nutplate installation and removal procedures, and safe practices related to manufacturing aircraft metal structures. Additional lab hours required.
SKT-103	Aerospace Assembly - Sheet Metal II	This is the second course in a series to prepare students for entry into the fabrication of sheet metal assemblies for the aircraft production industry. It covers topics in aerospace metal structures including gap, shim and sealing requirements and procedures. Additional lab hours required.
SKT-104	Aerospace Assembly - Mechanical Components	This course prepares students for entry into the aircraft production industry by providing skills in mechanical assemblies including safe practices, safetying practices, oxygen systems, hydraulics and line installation. Additional lab hours required.
SKT-105	Aerospace Assembly - Electrical Components	This course prepares students for entry into the aircraft production industry by providing entry-level skills in aircraft electrical assemblies including bonding, grounding, terminals, splices, connectors and shield termination. Additional lab hours required.
SKT-106	Electrical Training Alliance: Introduction to Electrical Profession	This is the introductory course to the Electrical Joint Apprenticeship and Training Committee. This course covers the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) Constitution and local union by-laws, the structure and heritage of the IBEW and National Electrical Contractors Association. Topics include workplace safety and leadership factors. Students identify tools of the trade; proper safety techniques; proper uses of ladders; and proper measurement and alignment techniques.	
SKT-107	Carpenter Joint Apprenticeship Program: Introduction to Carpentry	Introduction to Carpentry presents an overview of the Carpenters Joint Apprenticeship Program (CJAP) as well as the role of the carpenter on construction sites and the safety measures that are critical to the job. Specific equipment studied includes power tools, lifts, and scaffolds. Additionally, students will learn basic blueprint reading skills including the ability to distinguish the difference between different styles of drawings. Additional lab hours may be required.	
SKT-108	Carpenter Joint Apprenticeship Program: Workplace Learning I	Workplace Learning I is the component of on-the-job training experience of the First Year Carpenter Joint Apprenticeship Training Program. Students in this course will gain important workplace learning experience based on concepts learned in the first semester curriculum. Additional lab hours may be required.	
SKT-109	Carpenter Joint Apprenticeship Program: Concrete Form Building	This course, Carpenter Joint Apprenticeship Program: Concrete Form Building, is a continuation of the Carpenter's Joint Apprenticeship Training program, and will introduce students to basic concrete forming applications and systems, hardware identification, multiple anchoring procedures, concrete terminology, and provide the skills needed for competency in concrete construction. Students will learn to read detailed construction plans, basic building layout procedures, how to establish evaluations and install footings. Students will be given an opportunity to read forming diagrams and apply hands-on construction of concrete forms. Additional lab hours may be required.	
SKT-110	Carpenter Joint Apprenticeship Program: Interior Trim	Interior Trim is a continuation of the Joint Carpenter Training Council Apprenticeship curriculum. This course is designed with an emphasis on the commercial building aspects of construction. The class offers students extensive instruction in rough and finish commercial applications using metal studs, reading and understanding commercial blueprints, International Building Codes (IBC) and applying proper layout techniques. The course covers crown-molding trim, wall framing, and the use of construction lasers for plumbing, squaring, straightening, and leveling. Additional lab hours may be required.	
SKT-111	Electrical Training Alliance: Electrical Conduit Fabrication	Electrical Conduit Fabrication is part of the first year core Joint Electrical Training Council curriculum for new apprentices. This course introduces the basic concepts of conduit building. Students will identify and use proper tools, methods, and mathematical calculations to perform different types of bending for residential and commercial conduit assemblies. Additional lab hours may be required.	
SKT-112	Electrical Training Alliance: Workplace Learning I	Workplace Learning I is the component of "on-the-job training" experience of the First Semester Electrical Training Alliance Curriculum. Students will reinforce and apply concepts previously learned in coursework and in the workplace. Additional hours may be required.	
SOC-100	The Sociology of Human Relations	The study of sociology provides a framework for understanding the ways in which social institutions influence how people think about themselves and how they behave with others. This course applies this human relations framework to questions about how to build effective communities in diverse environments. Topics may include  developing open-mindedness toward cultural variations, working in diverse environments, adjusting to change, social responsibility for behavior, and conflict management.
SOC-101	Introduction to Sociology	This course is a general survey of the discipline of sociology. The course explores the reciprocal relationship between individuals and social institutions. Specifically it examines how social forces both shape and are shaped by beliefs and behaviors regarding ourselves and others.
SOC-103	Human Behavior at Work and in Business	Course framework will be the organization and what people must do to become more effective within it. Focus will be in five major areas  self-concept development, listening skills, expression, conflict resolution, and interpersonal skills.
SOC-126	Study of Psychodynamic Substances	This course will focus on the properties of drugs as chemicals and their impact on the body and mind. The history of drug use and abuse, issues surrounding addiction, factors that indicate a high risk to addiction and the interaction of drugs with each other will be examined.
SOC-201	Aspects of Aging	Examines the factors and forces that affect life quality in the late years. The physiological, psychological, and sociological aspects of aging will be considered, including those influences in the cultural context that enhance and impede continued growth of the person.
SOC-202	Social Problems	A survey course that offers a sociological examination of select global social problems. Topics of examination may include poverty, delinquency and crime, education, population, racial inequality, healthcare, gender inequality, alcohol and drugs, and environmental degradation, among others. The course also emphasizes research methodologies used to examine these problems as well as theoretical perspectives which can be used to understand the problems and, in turn, to create social change.
SOC-203	Crime and Society	This course examines the relationship between crime and various aspects of society. The course will critically analyze crime from multiple sociological perspectives, and will compare various types of crime and crime policy globally. The course will also examine the major substantive areas of crime and society.
SOC-204	Family and Society	This course examines the interaction between marriage, family, and society. Specifically, the course investigates how wider social forces influence marriages and families in historical and contemporary times. The course will critically analyze traditional conceptualizations of marriage and family, and examine the various forms contemporary families take. The course will also examine dynamics within families, such as parenting, violence and abuse, remarriage, divorce, aging, communication, and dealing with conflicts and crises.
SOC-211	Alcoholism and Drug Abuse	Course focuses on nature, causes, treatment and prevention of alcoholism and drug abuse. Strategies of education and treatment will be reviewed. Course designed to deal with problems encountered either personally or professionally. Course also looks at social and cultural factors in alcoholism and drug abuse.
SOC-212	Race and Ethnicity	This course explores the social and historical processes that shape race and ethnicity, focusing on the consequences for students' everyday lives. Students investigate how each are embedded in societal systems of privilege and oppression. The course ultimately challenges common definitions of race and offers students the opportunity to understand their lives within the context of racial injustice, ethnic diversity, and socially created difference.
SPA-101	Elementary Spanish I	This course is a beginning course that presents the basic sentence structure and vocabulary necessary to participate in elementary Spanish conversations. Students also begin reading short Spanish passages.
SPA-102	Elementary Spanish II	In this continuation of SPA 101, students continue their study of the basic elements of Spanish grammar, increase their vocabulary and enhance their ability to read and communicate in Spanish. Students enhance their global and intercultural competency through increased fluency in the language and a deeper exploration of historical and contemporary Hispanic culture. 
SPA-201	Intermediate Spanish I	In this continuation of SPA 102, students review and build grammar and vocabulary to enhance comprehension and communication. A variety of literary and cultural selections are presented to reinforce the student's understanding of global/intercultural themes.
SPA-202	Intermediate Spanish II	A continuation of SPA 201. Emphasis remains on the spoken language. A variety of literary and cultural selections are read and discussed in class in Spanish.  Additional lab hours required.
ST-104	Pharmacology for Surgical Technologists	The course is designed to provide the student with learning opportunities which will enable him to apply scientific principles of the biologic science of pharmacology. Emphasis is placed on the relationship of drugs to the surgical patient.
ST-105	Fundamentals of Surgical Technology	This course provides the student with skills necessary to function as a surgical technologist. Laboratory experience is focused so the student will achieve a satisfactory level of performance in gowning and gloving, surgical scrub, establishing and maintaining asepsis, draping, instrumentation, and proper care of the surgical patient. Students learn to work with and care for surgical equipment and supplies in both scrub and circulating roles. Students spend five hours per week at clinical site. Course will correlate with ST 101 so student may apply principles of theory and practicum.
ST-108	Introduction to Surgical Technology	This course will introduce the student to the field of surgical technology. Topics will include principles of aseptic technique and patient care in the operating room. Responsibilities and functions of the surgical technologists in the pre, intra-, and post operative phases will be discussed.
ST-109	Principles of Operating Room Communication	This course will address the modes of communication in the operating room, specifically focusing on medical/surgical terminology and computer technology utilization.
ST-110	Surgical Procedures I	This course will introduce the surgical technology student to the principles of surgical intervention and patient care considerations in multiple specialty areas. Pathophysiology, diagnostics, prognosis and complications of procedures will be addressed.
ST-111	Surgical Technology Clinical I	This course involves application of surgical technology principles in the hospital setting. Additional hours required.
ST-120	Principles of Surgical Technology	Principles of Surgical Technology is an introduction to the field of surgical technology. Concepts related to the professional healthcare environment, patient care, basic instrumentation and communication skills will be discussed.
ST-122	Medical/Surgical Terminology	Medical/Surgical Terminology addresses the medical language used in the operating room environment. Emphasis is placed on medical terms related to general and surgical medicine including disease processes, diagnostics, surgical procedures, treatment modalities and abbreviations. The formation, definition and pronunciation of medical terms will be discussed.
ST-124	Clinical Foundations	Clinical Foundations is a laboratory course which provides an introduction to the practical aspects of case management responsibilities for the surgical technologist in the scrub role. Topics covered will include basic case set-ups, gowning and gloving, instrumentation, maintenance of sterile technique, and sequence of surgical procedural tasks. Additional lab hours required.
ST-126	Surgical Equipment and Technological Concepts	Surgical Equipment and Technological Concepts provides the learner with technological information on the utilization and care of surgical equipment and instrumentation. Environmental disinfection and sterilization techniques will be addressed.
ST-128	Perioperative Case Management	Perioperative Case Management will cover preoperative, intraoperative and postoperative case management information for the surgical technologist. Sterile technique, procedural responsibilities, environmental controls and patient care issues will be addressed.
ST-210	Surgical Procedures II	This course is a continuation of Surgical Procedures I. Surgical procedures in advanced specialty areas will be introduced to the student. Content will include related pathophysiology, diagnostics, prognosis and complications.
ST-211	Surgical Technology Clinical II	This course involves advanced application of surgical technology principles in the hospital setting. Additional hours required.
ST-215	Surgical Pharmacology	Surgical Pharmacology is designed to introduce the student to the use, preparation and handling of medications in the surgical environment. Related terminology, common dosages, and principles of anesthesia administration will be covered.
ST-220	Procedures I	Procedures I introduces the principles of surgical intervention and patient care considerations in multiple specialty areas. Anatomy, pathophysiology, diagnostics, prognosis and complications of procedures will be addressed.
ST-224	Clinical Practice I	Clinical Practice I involves application of surgical technology principles in the laboratory and hospital setting. Laboratory practice will involve instruction of advanced techniques in preparation for clinical experience. Students will gain experience by performing learned clinical skills in a hospital surgical department. Additional hours required.
ST-228	Clinical Seminar	Clinical Seminar will provide discussion of student issues encountered in clinical practice. Students will provide critical analysis of procedural experiences in clinical case presentations.
ST-230	Procedures II	Procedures, a continuation of Procedures I, covers principles of surgical intervention and patient care considerations in advanced surgical specialty areas. Anatomy, pathophysiology, diagnostics, prognosis and complications of surgical procedures will be addressed.
ST-234	Clinical Practice II	Clinical Practice II is a continuation of Clinical Practice I. Students will further develop and refine their clinical skills by performing duties in the surgical technologist role in the hospital setting. Additional hours required.
ST-238	Professional Issues	Professional Issues will provide discussion on topics pertaining to professional skills benefitting the entry-level surgical technologist. Resume building, interview techniques, and career opportunities will be explored. Testing methodologies, strategies and simulated testing experiences for the Certified Surgical Technologist National Board Examination will be covered.
STR-050	Smart Start: Student Success	This course is designed to enhance students' knowledge, behaviors, and skills needed for successful transition to college.
STR-100	Smart Start College Success	This course provides all students with opportunities to learn college success strategies in an active learning environment. Topics will be relevant to individual student needs and goals.
THT-101	Introduction to Theatre	Introduction to Theatre is designed to enhance the enjoyment and appreciation of theatre. Students study theatre as a collaborative art form by examining the roles and functions of playwrights, actors, directors, and designers in both traditional and contemporary contexts.
THT-102	Stagecraft	The purpose of this course is to study the technical areas of theatre production  emphasis will be on scenery construction and rigging; paints and the painting of scenery; stage lighting; costume design; and construction. Included will be a survey of terminology and equipment for the stage.
THT-104	Theatre Practicum	Practical application of acting (when cast) and production techniques. Assignments are made on an individual basis.
THT-105	Theatre Practicum	Practical application of acting (when cast) and production techniques. Assignments are made on an individual basis.
THT-106	Theatre Practicum	Practical application of acting (when cast) and production techniques. Assignments are made on an individual basis.
THT-107	Playwriting	This course explores the fundamental processes of playwriting. It will provide the beginning student with opportunities to investigate the concepts of dialogue, plot, characterization, mood, conflict and setting as they relate to writing for the theatre.
THT-108	Acting I	Emphasis on application of principles of theory of creative acting. Exercises in movement and voice are integrated with improvisational technique.
THT-109	Acting II	Continuation of THT 108. Performance of scenes from both classical and contemporary plays is required in class. Emphasis is on individual development in the use of principles and styles of acting.
THT-110	History of Theatre	This course explores the development of the art of theatre from its beginnings to the present. Periods of history of greatest significance in the evolution of theatre will be emphasized. Elements of the theatre will be examined including theatre artists, plays, technical aspects and performance styles within diverse geographical, socio-cultural and historical contexts.
THT-115	Acting for the Camera	This course includes the following  (1) exploration of the aesthetics and principles of acting for the camera; (2) analysis of diverse acting styles and outstanding performances in film and television; and (3) acting exercises for the camera. Some acting exercises will be videotaped and edited for analysis. (Same course as MCM 115).
THT-201	Directing	This course focuses on the process of directing for the stage. Emphasis is placed on the role of the director as the interpretive artist, collaborator, and stager. Importance will be given to leadership skills and time management.
WMS-100	Introduction to Women's Studies	This course is an introduction into the field of Women's Studies. Women's issues are explored from a variety of disciplines. An emphasis will be placed on personal experience and its relationship to larger social structures. The focus of this course is to develop a sense of empowerment and critical thinking in students.
XRT-101	Radiographic Procedures I	This course covers radiographic anatomy, positioning and examination procedures for the chest, abdomen, urinary system, gastrointestinal systems, selected portions of the upper extremity (limb) and mobile radiography. Basic radiation protection, patient care procedures and radiographic terminology are presented. Additional lab hours required.
XRT-102	Radiographic Procedures II	This course covers radiographic anatomy, positioning, and examination procedures for the humerus, shoulder girdle, lower extremity (limb), femur, pelvic girdle, vertebral column, bony thorax and pediatric radiography. Additional lab hours required.
XRT-103	Radiographic Procedures III	This course covers radiographic positioning, anatomy and examination procedures of the cranium and sinuses. The procedures and principles of surgical and trauma radiography are presented. The student will be introduced to various patient care and management considerations and pharmacology principles. Additional lab hours required.
XRT-104	Principles of Radiographic Exposure I	This course will give students a foundation in radiographic image acquisition and evaluation of image quality. An in-depth coverage of technical factors and image characteristics will be presented. Additional lab hours required.
XRT-105	Principles of Radiographic Exposure II	This course is an in-depth coverage of image acquisition technologies, accessories, advanced technical factor selection and effects on image quality and patient exposure. Additional lab hours required.
XRT-107	Radiologic Physics I	This course covers the fundamental principles of radiation physics and equipment to include the study of x-ray tubes, rating charts, radiation control devices and automatic processing.
XRT-108	Radiologic Physics II	This course examines the x-ray machine through discussion of basic electrical concepts and circuit design. The course also examines x-ray tubes, high voltage sources and exposure timers.
XRT-111	Clinical Education I	This course is designed to provide the student with an overview of all aspects of the radiology department and responsibilities of a radiologic technologist. Additional hours required.
XRT-112	Clinical Education II	This course is designed to provide the student with the clinical applications of basic radiographic positioning, radiation protection, patient care, radiographic exposure factors and image processing. Additional hours required.
XRT-116	Clinical Education III	This course is designed to provide the student with an introduction to pediatric radiography and development of critical thinking skills in radiographic procedures.  Additional hours required.
XRT-121	Radiographic Image Evaluation I	This course provides a critical analysis of radiographic images in the examination of the respiratory, abdominal, digestive, and urinary systems.
XRT-122	Radiographic Image Evaluation II	This course provides a critical analysis involving radiographic images of the upper and lower extremities, the shoulder and pelvic girdles, bony thorax and vertebral column.
XRT-207	Radiologic Pathology	This course is a presentation of the more commonly encountered lesions of the human body as seen through the medium of x-ray. Anatomy and physiology of pathologic processes are presented by body systems as a means of exploring the rationale of many intricate radiologic examinations.
XRT-208	Advanced Imaging Modalities	This course presents advanced imaging modalities with an emphasis on computed tomography. Additional modalities introduced are digital radiography, magnetic resonance, sonography, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, mammography, bone densitometry, fluoroscopy, linear tomography and fusion technology. The procedures and principles of interventional radiography are presented.
XRT-209	Radiobiology	This course is designed to explore the biological consequences of radiation exposure on the human body. The principles of radiation protection will be examined.
XRT-211	Radiologic Technology Review	This course is designed to provide a comprehensive review of the major components of radiologic technology in preparation for the American Registry of Radiologic Technologist (ARRT) national certification exam.
XRT-212	Professional Development in Radiography	This course explores topics in the field of radiologic technology. Those topics include current trends in the imaging profession, career options, the importance of continuing education to the profession and professional traits of a registered Radiologic Technologist.
XRT-213	Clinical Education IV	This course is designed to provide the student with an introduction to the specialized areas of the operating room and trauma radiography.
XRT-214	Clinical Education V	This course is designed to provide the student with an overview of interventional radiography, computed tomography (CT), diagnostic medical sonography (DMS), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), nuclear medicine (NM) and radiation therapy (RT).
XRT-215	Clinical Education VI	This course is designed to provide the student with the opportunity to complete all American Registry of Radiologic Technologists (ARRT) and Radiography program remaining clinical competency requirements.
